--- Page 15 ---
The Survey Design
The Purpose
Rationale for Using the Survey Method
Type of Survey Method
Specify the Form of Data Collection
The Population and Sample
The Population
Sampling Design
Type of Sampling
Population Stratification
Sample Size Determination
Power Analysis
Instrumentation
The Survey Instruments Used to Collect Data
Instruments and Measures
Validity of Scores Using the Instrument
Reliability of Scores on the Instrument
Inter-Rater Reliability
Sample Items
Content of an Instrument
Pilot Testing
Administering the Survey
Variables in the Study
Data Analysis
Preregistering the Study Plan
Interpreting Results and Writing a Discussion
Section
Reporting Results
Statistical Tests in Survey Research
Practical Evidence
Context of Previous Studies
Components of an Experimental Study Method
Plan
Participants
Recruiting Participants
Random Assignment
Power Analysis for Sample Size
Formal Design Statement
Variables
Independent Variables
Manipulation Check
Dependent Variables
Other Variables

--- Page 16 ---
Instrumentation and Materials
Materials
Cover Story
Experimental Procedures
Type of Experiment
► Example 8.1 Pre-Experimental Designs
► Example 8.2 Quasi-Experimental Designs
► Example 8.3 True Experimental Designs
► Example 8.4 Single-Subject Designs
Threats to Validity
Internal Validity
External Validity
The Procedure
Data Analysis
Reporting the Descriptive Statistics
Preliminary Analysis
Inferential Statistical Tests
Factorial Designs
Single-Subject Designs
Preregistering the Study Plan
Interpreting Results and Writing a Discussion
Section
► Example 8.5 An Experimental Method Plan
Summary
Key Terms
Writing Exercises
Additional Readings
Chapter 9 Qualitative Methods
Learning Objectives
Introduction
Putting Qualitative Research Into Context
Participants’ Meanings
Natural Setting
Researcher as Key Instrument
Multiple Sources of Data
Inductive and Deductive Data Analysis
Emergent Design
Reflexivity
Researcher’s Role
A Complex Account
The Approach or Design
Descriptive Methods
Analytic Frameworks

--- Page 17 ---
Data Collection Procedures
Sampling and Recruitment
Permissions
Data Collection Types
Ethical Issues
Data Recording Procedures
Observation Protocol or Guide
Interview Protocol
Data Analysis Procedures
Simultaneous Procedures
Winnowing the Data
Using Qualitative Computer Software Programs
Steps in the Analytic Process
Step 1. Organizing and Preparing the Data for
Analysis
Step 2. Reading Through All the Data
Step 3. Coding the Data
Step 4. Identifying Themes
Step 5. Developing a Story Line Interpretation
Step 6. Further Analyzing the Data Using an
Analytic Framework
Step 7. Representing and Interpreting the
Data
Coding the Data
Expected Codes
Surprising Codes
Codes of Unusual or Conceptual Interest
Predetermined Codes
Visual Images as Codes
Interpretation
Validity and Reliability
Defining Qualitative Validity
Validity Strategies
Reliability Strategies
Intercoder Agreement
Qualitative Generalization
Writing the Qualitative Report
Writing Strategies
A Sample Qualitative Method Section
The Qualitative Research Paradigm
The Ethnographic Research Design
The Researcher’s Role
Bounding the Study

--- Page 18 ---
Setting
Actors
Events
Processes
Ethical Considerations
Data Collection Strategies
Data Analysis Procedures
Verification
Reporting the Findings
Summary
Key Terms
Writing Exercises
Additional Readings
Chapter 10 Mixed Methods Procedures
Learning Objectives
Introduction
Putting Mixed Methods Research in Perspective
Characteristics of Mixed Methods Research
Justification for Using Mixed Methods Research
Definitions of Mixed Methods Terms
Open- and Closed-Ended Data
Research Design
Integration
Joint Display
Metainferences
The Process of Conducting a Mixed Methods Study
Quantitative and Qualitative Data Collection
Core Mixed Methods Designs
The Convergent Mixed Methods Design
Explanatory Sequential Mixed Methods Design
Exploratory Sequential Mixed Methods Design
Complex Mixed Methods Designs
Types of Complex Designs
Development of Complex Designs
Examples of Complex Designs
Incorporating Core Designs Into Complex
Designs
Factors Important in Choosing a Mixed Methods
Design
Choice Based on Intent and Procedures
Other Reasons for Choosing a Design
Popular Designs in a Field or Discipline
The Single Researcher Versus a Team

--- Page 19 ---
Choice of Design by Advisers or Mentors
Secondary Reasons for a Choice
Examples of Mixed Methods Procedures
► Example 10.1 A Convergent Mixed Methods
Design
► Example 10.2 An Explanatory Sequential Mixed
Methods Design
► Example 10.3 An Exploratory Sequential Mixed
Methods Design
► Example 10.4 Social Justice Design
Summary
Key Terms
Writing Exercises
Additional Readings
Glossary
References
Author Index
Subject Index

--- Page 20 ---
PREFACE
PURPOSE
This book advances a framework, a process, and compositional
approaches for designing a proposal or research project for
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods research in the human,
health, and social sciences. The ascendency of qualitative research,
the emergence of mixed methods approaches, and the growth of
quantitative designs have created a need for this book’s unique
comparison of the three approaches to inquiry. This comparison
begins with preliminary philosophical assumptions for all three
approaches, a review of the literature, an assessment of the use of
theory and conceptual frameworks in research approaches, and
reflections about the importance of writing and ethics in scholarly
inquiry. The book then addresses the key elements in the process of
designing and conducting a research project: writing an introduction;
stating a purpose or research aims for the study; identifying research
questions and hypotheses; and advancing methods and procedures
for data collection, analysis, and interpretation. At each step in this
process, the reader is taken through qualitative, quantitative, and
mixed methods approaches.
AUDIENCE
This book is intended for students and faculty who seek assistance in
preparing a plan, proposal, or research project for a scholarly journal
article, a dissertation, a thesis, or an application for funding. At a
broader level, the book may be useful as both a reference book and
a textbook for courses in research methods. To best take advantage
of the design features in this book, the reader needs a basic
familiarity with qualitative and quantitative research; however, terms
will be explained and defined and recommended strategies advanced
for those needing introductory assistance in the design process.
Highlighted terms in the text and a glossary of the terms at the back
of the book provide a working language for understanding research.
This book also is intended for a broad audience in the human, health,

--- Page 21 ---
and social sciences. Readers’ comments from the past five editions
suggest that individuals using the book come from many disciplines
and fields. We hope that researchers in fields such as marketing,
management, criminal justice, communication studies, psychology,
sociology, K–12 education, higher and postsecondary education,
nursing, family medicine, health services research, global health,
behavioral health, urban studies, family research, and other fields of
study will find this sixth edition useful.
FORMAT
In each chapter, we share examples drawn from varied disciplines.
We drew examples from books, journal articles, dissertation
proposals, and dissertations. Although our primary specializations are
educational psychology, the health sciences, and psychology, the
illustrations are inclusive of many fields. They reflect issues in social
justice and examples of studies with marginalized individuals in our
society as well as the traditional samples and populations studied by
researchers. Inclusiveness also extends to methodological pluralism
in research today, and the discussion incorporates alternative
philosophical ideas, diverse modes of inquiry, and numerous
procedures.
This book is not a detailed method text; instead, we highlight the
essential features of research design. We have attempted to reduce
research to its core ideas so that researchers can plan a thorough
and thoughtful study. The coverage of research designs is limited to
frequently used forms: surveys and experiments in quantitative
research; narrative research, phenomenology, grounded theory,
ethnography, and case studies in qualitative research; and
convergent, explanatory sequential, and exploratory sequential
designs in mixed methods research. Although students preparing a
dissertation proposal should find this book helpful, topics related to
the politics of presenting and negotiating a study with review
committees are addressed thoroughly in other texts.
Consistent with accepted conventions of scholarly writing, we have
tried to eliminate any words or examples that convey a discriminatory
(e.g., sexist or ethnic) orientation. Examples were selected to provide
a full range of gender and cultural orientations. Throughout the text
we do not favor either qualitative or quantitative research. Indeed, we

--- Page 22 ---
have intentionally altered the order of qualitative and quantitative
examples throughout the book. Readers should also note in the
longer examples cited in this book many references made to other
writings. We cite only references we use in this book, not the entire
list of references embedded within examples. As with earlier editions,
we have maintained features to enhance the readability and
understandability of the material: bullets to emphasize key points,
numbered points to stress key steps in a process, and longer
examples of complete passages with annotations to highlight key
research ideas.
NEW FEATURES IN THE SIXTH EDITION
In this sixth edition of the book, we have added new features in
response to reviewers’ comments and emerging trends in research
methods:
We offer more inclusive and supportive language in our
discussions throughout the book.
New tables and figures clarify content, such as the difference
between a research problem, a purpose or aim, and a research
question.
Research methods is a living and evolving science. We updated
the text to capture new trends and include new references to
bring a state-of-the-art discussion to the book.
Each chapter now begins with learning objectives.
We have reorganized and added a number of new features to
the quantitative methods chapter.
The structure of the three methods chapters—quantitative,
qualitative, and mixed methods—now show a similar and
consistent sequence of method topics.
As in previous editions, we alternate starting with quantitative
research and then qualitative research to give preference to both
approaches.

--- Page 23 ---
The chapter on mixed methods research reflects updated
content and current views.
Throughout the text we inserted new, updated examples.
We added tables in a couple of the chapters to define key terms
needed by the reader. We recognize that mixed methods
research has its own unique terminology.
We have clarified and improved the writing exercises to help
readers better achieve learning objectives.
OUTLINE OF THE CHAPTERS
This book is divided into two parts. Part I comprises steps that
researchers need to consider before they develop their proposals or
plans for research. Part II discusses the sections used to develop a
scholarly research proposal for a thesis, dissertation, or a research
report.

--- Page 24 ---
Part I. Preliminary Considerations
This part of the book discusses preparing for the design of a
scholarly study. It contains Chapters 1 through 4.
Chapter 1. The Selection of a Research Approach
In this chapter, we begin by defining quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed methods approaches. We then discuss how philosophy,
designs, and methods intersect when one uses one of these
approaches. We review different philosophical stances (postpositivist,
constructivist, transformative, and pragmatic); advance types of
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods designs; and then
discuss the methods associated with each design. We also consider
the factors for choosing an approach to research. Thus, this chapter
should help proposal developers decide whether a qualitative,
quantitative, or mixed methods approach is suitable for their
proposed research project.
Chapter 2. Review of the Literature
It is important to extensively review the literature on your topic before
you design your proposal. Thus, you need to begin with a
researchable topic and a draft topic and then explore the literature
using the steps advanced in this chapter. Realize that literature
reviews differ for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods
projects. The steps call for searching the literature, using
computerized databases, locating a small number of studies to
review, evaluating the quality of the information sources, developing a
literature map, and assembling a summary of the literature. This
chapter should help researchers thoughtfully consider relevant
literature on their topics and start compiling and writing literature
reviews.
Chapter 3. The Use of Theory

--- Page 25 ---
Theories serve different purposes in the three approaches inquiry. In
quantitative research, they provide a proposed explanation for the
relationship among variables tested by the investigator. Different
types of quantitative variables are related in theories and often
presented as causal models indicating a time ordering. In qualitative
research, they may often serve as a lens for the inquiry, or they may
be generated during the study. In mixed methods studies,
researchers employ them in many ways, including those associated
with quantitative and qualitative approaches. This chapter helps
researchers consider and plan how to incorporate theory into their
studies.
Chapter 4. Writing Strategies and Ethical
Considerations
It is helpful to have an overall outline of topics in a proposal or
research study before you begin writing. Thus, this chapter begins
with a general model of questions addressed in a good proposal. It
then presents the structure of a proposal for a qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods study with different outlines for
writing proposals. Writing clearly and concisely is a necessary part of
a good proposal, and the discussion turns to writing strategies. The
act of writing helps researchers think through a project. The project
needs to be easy to read, coherent with sections tied together, and
grammatically correct. Ethical issues that arise in projects also need
attention. Strategies need to be developed to attend to issues arising
prior to and during the conduct of the study. Ethical issues also arise
in the reporting and dissemination of a study.

--- Page 26 ---
PART II. DESIGNING RESEARCH
In Part II, we turn to the components of designing the research
proposal. Chapters 5 through 10 address steps in this process.
Chapter 5. The Introduction
It is important to properly introduce a research study. We provide a
model for writing a good scholarly introduction to your proposal. The
chapter begins with designing an abstract for a study. This is followed
by developing an introduction to include identifying the research
problem or issue, framing this problem within the existing literature,
pointing out deficiencies in the literature, and targeting the study for
an audience. This chapter provides a systematic method for
designing a scholarly introduction to a proposal or study.
Chapter 6. The Purpose Statement
At the beginning of research proposals or projects, authors mention
the central purpose or study aim. This passage is the most important
statement in the entire research process, and an entire chapter is
devoted to this topic. In this chapter, you learn how to write this
statement for qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies.
Scripts, to be filled in with your project, provide practical statements
that will ease your process of designing a proposal or a research
study.
Chapter 7. Research Questions and Hypotheses
The questions and hypotheses addressed by the researcher serve to
narrow and focus the purpose of the study. As a major signpost in a
project, research questions and hypotheses need to be written
carefully. In this chapter, you will learn how to write both qualitative
and quantitative research questions and hypotheses as well as how
to employ both forms in writing mixed methods questions and
hypotheses. Numerous examples serve as scripts to illustrate these
processes.

--- Page 27 ---
Chapter 8. Quantitative Methods
Quantitative methods involve the processes of collecting, analyzing,
interpreting, and writing the results of a study. Specific methods exist
in both survey and experimental research that relate to identifying a
sample and population, specifying the type of design, collecting and
analyzing data, presenting the results, making an interpretation, and
writing the research in a manner consistent with a survey or
experimental study. In this chapter, the reader learns the specific
procedures for designing survey or experimental methods that need
to go into a research proposal. This chapter provides checklists to
ensure the inclusion of all steps.
Chapter 9. Qualitative Methods
Qualitative approaches to data collection, analysis, interpretation, and
report writing differ from the traditional, quantitative approaches.
Purposeful sampling, open-ended data collection, text or images
analysis (e.g., pictures), figures and tables, representations, and
personal interpretations of the findings all inform qualitative methods.
This chapter advances steps in designing qualitative procedures into
a research proposal, and it also includes a checklist for making sure
that you cover important procedures. Ample illustrations provide
examples from narrative studies, phenomenology, grounded theory,
ethnography, case studies, and descriptive studies.
Chapter 10. Mixed Methods Procedures
Mixed methods research involves the collection and “mixing” or
integration of both quantitative and qualitative data in a study. It is not
enough to only analyze your qualitative and quantitative data. Further
analysis comprises integrating the two databases for additional
insight into research problems and questions. Mixed methods
research has increased in popularity in recent years, and this chapter
highlights important developments and introduces the use of this
design. This chapter begins by defining mixed methods research and
the core characteristics that describe it. Then it takes the reader
through the process of designing a method section for a proposal or
plan. This process involves collecting both quantitative (closed-ended)

--- Page 28 ---
and qualitative (open-ended) data based on research questions or
hypotheses. This is followed by identifying a mixed methods design
with the intent and procedures to integrate the two databases. We
discuss three core designs and four complex designs. To analyze the
integration we suggest using a joint display that arrays the
quantitative and qualitative data or results in a table. Then
researchers examine the table and draw inferences or insight from
integrating the two databases. Choosing a mixed methods design
involves considering the intent and the procedures for integrating the
data. Flowcharts in the chapter help researchers decide on an
appropriate mixed methods design for their studies.
Designing a study is a difficult and time-consuming process. This
book will not necessarily make the process easier or faster, but it can
provide specific skills useful in research, knowledge about the steps
involved in the process, and a practical guide to composing and
writing scholarly research. Before the steps of the process unfold, we
recommend that proposal developers think through their approaches
to research, conduct literature reviews on their topics, develop an
outline of topics to include in a proposal design, and begin anticipating
potential ethical issues that may arise in the research.

--- Page 29 ---
COMPANION WEBSITE
The SAGE edge companion site for Research Design, Sixth Edition,
is available at edge.sagepub.com/creswellrd6e.
The Student Study Site provides a personalized approach to help
students accomplish their coursework goals.
Videos featuring John W. Creswell and others expand on
important topics in research design.
SAGE Journal articles plus accompanying exercises provide
opportunities to apply concepts from each chapter.
Sample research proposals and templates offer further
guidance on research design.
The Instructor Resources Site supports teaching by making it easy to
integrate quality content and create a rich learning environment.
Editable, chapter-specific PowerPoint® slides offer ease and
flexibility in creating multimedia presentations.
A diverse range of prewritten and editable test questions helps
assess progress and understanding.
The Instructor’s Manual highlights key concepts from each
chapter and provides a helpful reference and teaching tool
including:
Chapter-specific writing and peer review exercises that
emphasize critical thinking and application of the concepts
Discussion questions and group activities that launch
classroom interaction and encourage students to engage

--- Page 30 ---
further with the material
All figures and tables from the book are available for download.

--- Page 31 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book could not have been written without the encouragement
and ideas of the hundreds of students in the doctoral-level Proposal
Development course that John taught at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln for over 30 years. Specific former students and editors were
instrumental in its development: Dr. Sharon Hudson, Dr. Leon
Cantrell, the late Nette Nelson, Dr. De Tonack, Dr. Ray Ostrander,
and Diane Wells. Since the publication of the first edition, John has
also become indebted to the students in his introductory research
methods courses and to individuals who have participated in his
qualitative and mixed methods seminars. These courses have been
his laboratories for working out ideas, incorporating new ones, and
sharing his experiences as a writer and researcher. In addition, John
wants to thank his staff over the years in the Office of Qualitative and
Mixed Methods Research at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln who
have helped conceptualize content in this book and now those in the
Department of Family Medicine at the University of Michigan. John is
especially indebted to the scholarly work of Dr. Vicki Plano Clark, Dr.
Ron Shope, Dr. Kim Galt, Dr. Yun Lu, Dr. Sherry Wang, Amanda
Garrett, and Dr. Alex Morales. David wants to thank his dad (who
was his first mentor) for inspiring him to pursue research methods
and psychological science in his life’s work. David has been teaching
quantitative research methods for more than 15 years and is indebted
to his students for helping him understand the common opportunities
and challenges facing students as they design their first research
projects. He is grateful to share his insights and approaches in the
new edition of this book.
In addition, we are grateful for the insightful suggestions provided by
the reviewers for SAGE. We also could not have produced this book
without the generous support and encouragement of our friends at
SAGE. SAGE is and has been a first-rate publishing house. We
especially owe much to our former editor and mentor, C. Deborah
Laughton (now of Guilford Press), and to Lisa Cuevas-Shaw and
Vicki Knight. Now we are working under the talented guidance of
Leah Fargotstein, who has been most supportive of our work and
who has encouraged us throughout the process. Last, we want to
thank all of the SAGE staff with whom we have had the pleasure to
work. We have grown together and helped develop research

--- Page 32 ---
methods as a distinguished, worldwide field. At SAGE, we have also
benefited from the contributions of reviewers to this fifth edition: Clare
Bennett, University of Worcester; Kelly Kennedy, Chapman University;
Therese A. G. Lewis, Northumbria University; Andrew Ryder,
University of North Carolina Wilmington; Tiffany J. Davis, University of
Houston; Lora L. Wolff, Western Illinois University; Laura Meyer,
University of Denver; Andi Hess, Arizona State University; and Audrey
Cund, University of the West of Scotland. The authors and SAGE
would like to thank the following reviewers of the sixth edition:
Krishna Bista Morgan State University, Maryland
Keisa Boykin University of Saint Augustine for Health Sciences
Lihua Dishman A. T. Still University of Health Sciences
Cassandra Johnson Texas State University
Aujean Lee University of Oklahoma
James Perren Alliant International University
EJ Summers Texas State University

--- Page 33 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
John W. Creswell,
PhD, is a professor of family medicine and senior research scientist
at the Michigan Mixed Methods Program at the University of
Michigan. He has authored numerous articles and 33 books on mixed
methods research, qualitative research, and research design. While
at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln, he held the Clifton Endowed
Professor Chair, served as Director of the Mixed Methods Research
Office, founded SAGE’s Journal of Mixed Methods Research, and
was an adjunct professor of family medicine at the University of
Michigan and a consultant to the Veterans Administration health
services research center in Ann Arbor, Michigan. He was a Senior
Fulbright Scholar to South Africa in 2008 and to Thailand in 2012. In
2011, he co-led a National Institutes of Health working group on the
“best practices of mixed methods research in the health sciences”
and in 2014 served as a visiting professor at Harvard’s School of
Public Health. In 2014, he was the founding President of the Mixed
Methods International Research Association. In 2015, he joined the

--- Page 34 ---
staff of Family Medicine at the University of Michigan to co-direct the
Michigan Mixed Methods Program. In 2016, he received an honorary
doctorate from the University of Pretoria, South Africa. In 2017, he
co-authored the American Psychological Association “standards” on
qualitative and mixed methods research. In 2018 his book Qualitative
Inquiry and Research Design (with Cheryl Poth) won the Textbook
and Academic Author’s 2018 McGuffey Longevity Award in the United
States. He currently makes his home in Ashiya, Japan, and Honolulu,
Hawaii.
J. David Creswell,
PhD, is the William S. Dietrich II Professor in Psychology and
Director of the Health and Human Performance laboratory at
Carnegie Mellon University. Much of his research is quantitative in
nature and focuses on understanding what makes people resilient
under stress. He has published more than 75 peer-reviewed articles,
co-edited the Handbook of Mindfulness (2015, Guilford), and
received early career awards for his research from the Association
for Psychological Science (2011), the American Psychological
Association (2014), and the American Psychosomatic Society (2017).
These research contributions came from a childhood and adulthood of
discussing research methodology with his dad, so this book now

--- Page 35 ---
extends a collaboration going back many years! David has been
teaching research methods courses for the past 16 years as a
professor in psychology.

--- Page 36 ---
PART I PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS
Chapter 1 The Selection of a Research Approach
Chapter 2 Review of the Literature
Chapter 3 The Use of Theory
Chapter 4 Writing Strategies and Ethical Considerations
This book is intended to help researchers develop a plan or proposal
for a research study. Part I addresses several preliminary
considerations that are necessary before designing a proposal or a
plan for a study. These considerations relate to selecting an
appropriate research approach, reviewing the literature to position
the proposed study within the existing literature, deciding on whether
to use a theory in the study, and employing—at the outset—good
writing and ethical practices.

--- Page 37 ---
CHAPTER 1 THE SELECTION OF A RESEARCH APPROACH
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Define major research terms used in this book so that you can incorporate them into your
projects.
2. Describe the three major methodologies and their differences to select an appropriate
methodology for your study.
3. Describe the relationship among the terms, philosophical worldview assumptions, designs,
and methods. How would you connect these three components in your study?
4. Appraise which one of the philosophical worldviews fits your experiences, training, and
cultural orientation.
5. Identify which one of the types of research designs you will use in your study.
6. Describe the differences between quantitative methods, qualitative methods, and mixed
methods research.
7. Identify the reasons for choosing either a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods approach
to use in your study.
INTRODUCING KEY TERMS IN THIS CHAPTER
Research has its own language, and it is important to understand key terms to use in a study. The title of
this book uses the term, research approaches. Research approaches (or methodologies) are
procedures for research that span the steps from broad assumptions to detailed methods of data
collection, analysis, and interpretation. This plan involves several decisions, and researchers need not
take them in the order in which they are presented here. The overall decision involves which approach
should be used to study a topic. Informing this decision should be the philosophical assumptions the
researcher brings to the study; procedures of inquiry (called research designs); and specific research
methods of data collection, analysis, and interpretation. The selection of a research approach includes
the research problem or issue being addressed, the researchers’ personal experiences, and the
audiences for the study. Thus, in this book, philosophical assumptions, research approaches, research
designs, and research methods are four key terms representing a perspective about research flow from
broad constructions of research to the narrow procedures of methods. Table 1.1 explains these key
terms in more detail.
Table 1.1 Key Terms and Their Definitions as Used in This Chapter

--- Page 38 ---
Key Terms Definitions
Philosophical Before a study begins, a researcher brings a point of view and a set of beliefs to the
Assumptions research process that informs their approach to conducting the study. Philosophical
assumptions are these beliefs and values. They emphasize what the researcher
holds to be most important in conducting a study. Philosophical assumptions develop
from an individual’s training in a specific discipline or field of study (e.g., psychology).
They also emerge from prior experiences in research and the cultural environment of
an individual.
Research We will use the term research approach synonymously with research methodology.
Approach This term represents different types of research to have historically emerged. In this
chapter, we will present three broad methodologies: quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed methods.
Research We use the term research design to mean the ways of conducting research within a
Design broad methodology. Thus, as seen in this chapter, broad methodologies can be
subdivided into different types of designs. Each design has its own procedures used
in conducting a study.
Research Within a particular design, the researcher gathers data, analyzes it, and makes an
Methods interpretation of its meaning. These are the methods in a study.
THREE APPROACHES OR METHODOLOGIES IN RESEARCH
In this book, we advance three broad research approaches or methodologies: (a) qualitative, (b)
quantitative, and (c) mixed methods. Unquestionably, the three approaches are not as discrete as they
first appear. Researchers should not view qualitative and quantitative approaches as rigid, distinct

--- Page 39 ---
categories, opposites, or dichotomies. Instead, they represent different ends on a continuum (Creswell &
Guetterman, 2018; Newman & Benz, 1998). A study tends to be more qualitative than quantitative or vice
versa. Mixed methods research resides in the middle of this continuum because it incorporates elements
of both qualitative and quantitative approaches.
Often the distinction between qualitative research and quantitative research is framed in terms of using
words (qualitative) rather than numbers (quantitative) or, better yet, using closed-ended questions and
responses (quantitative hypotheses) or open-ended questions and responses (qualitative interview
questions). A more complete way to view the gradations of differences between them is found in the
basic philosophical assumptions researchers bring to the study, the types of research strategies used in
the research (e.g., quantitative experiments or qualitative case studies), and the specific methods
employed in conducting these strategies (e.g., collecting data quantitatively on instruments versus
collecting qualitative data through observing a setting). Moreover, there is a historical evolution to both
approaches—with the quantitative approaches dominating the forms of research in the social sciences
from the late 19th century until the mid-20th century. During the latter half of the 20th century, interest in
qualitative research increased and mixed methods research developed. With this background, it should
prove helpful to view definitions of these three key terms as used in this book:
Qualitative research is an approach for exploring and understanding the meaning individuals or
groups ascribe to a social or human problem. The research process involves emerging questions and
procedures, data typically collected in the participant’s setting, data analysis inductively building from
particulars to general themes, and the researcher making interpretations of the meaning of the data.
The final written report has a flexible structure. Those who engage in this form of inquiry use an
inductive style building from data to themes and a focus on individual meaning, and emphasize the
importance of reporting the complexity of a situation.
Quantitative research is an approach for testing objective theories by examining the relationship
among variables or a comparison among groups. These variables, in turn, can be measured,
typically on instruments, so that numbered data can be analyzed using statistical procedures. The
final written report has a set structure comprising an introduction, methods, results, and discussion.
Quantitative researchers test theories deductively, build into a study protections against bias, control
for alternative or counterfactual explanations, and seek to generalize and replicate the findings.
Mixed methods research is an approach to inquiry involving collecting both quantitative and
qualitative data, using a specific procedure or design, combining (or integrating) the two forms of
data within the design, and drawing conclusions (metainferences) about the insight to emerge from
the combined databases. This description emphasizes a methods perspective focused on
understanding mixed methods research from its data collection, data analysis, and interpretation.
Also, in mixed methods a researcher brings philosophical assumptions and theories that inform the
conduct of the research.
THREE MAJOR COMPONENTS OF A RESEARCH APPROACH
The broad research approach is the plan or proposal to conduct research, involving the intersection of
philosophy, research designs, and specific methods. Figure 1.1 presents a framework that we use to
explain the interaction of these three components. In planning a study, researchers need to think through
the philosophical worldview assumptions that they bring to the study, the research design that is related
to this worldview, and the specific methods or procedures of research that translate the approach into
practice.

--- Page 40 ---
Description
Figure 1.1 A Framework for Research—The Interconnection of Worldviews, Design,
and Research Methods
Philosophical Worldviews
Although philosophical ideas remain largely hidden in research (Slife & Williams, 1995), they still influence
the practice of research and need to be identified. We suggest that individuals preparing a research
proposal or plan make the larger philosophical ideas they espouse explicit. This information will help
explain why they chose qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods approaches for their research. In
writing about worldviews, a proposal might include a section that addresses the following:
The philosophical worldview being used by the researcher
A definition of basic ideas of that worldview
An individual’s worldview drawn on research experiences, training, or cultural environment
How the worldview shaped their approach to research
We have chosen to use the term worldview as meaning “a basic set of beliefs that guide action” (Guba,
1990, p. 17). Others have called them paradigms (Lincoln et al., 2011; Mertens, 2010); epistemologies
and ontologies (Crotty, 1998), or broadly conceived research methodologies (Neuman, 2009). We
prefer the word “worldview” because it brings a global perspective to research in this era of international
interconnections. We see worldviews as a general philosophical orientation about the world and the
nature of research that a researcher brings to a study.
Individuals develop worldviews based on their discipline orientations and research communities, advisers
and mentors, past research experiences, and cultural experiences. Individual researchers’ beliefs based
on these factors will often lead to embracing a strong qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods
approach in their research. The philosophical beliefs are important to include in a study because a reader
can best interpret the research knowing the biases and the particular stance being taken by the
researcher. We recognize that in quantitative research the position of the researcher remains largely
hidden and not expressed; still we feel that it needs to be presented in the open for readers to interpret a
study.
Although there is ongoing debate about what worldviews or beliefs researchers bring to inquiry, we will
highlight four widely discussed in the literature: postpositivism, constructivism, transformative, and
pragmatism. The major elements of each position are presented in Table 1.2.
Table 1.2 Four Worldviews

--- Page 41 ---
Postpositivism Constructivism
Determination Understanding
Reductionism Multiple participant meanings
Empirical observation and measurement Social and historical construction
Theory verification Theory generation
Transformative Pragmatism
Political Consequences of actions
Power and justice oriented Problem centered
Collaborative Pluralistic
Change oriented Real-world practice oriented
The Postpositivist Worldview
Postpositivist worldviews have represented the traditional form of research, and these assumptions hold
true more for quantitative research than qualitative research. This worldview is sometimes called the
scientific method or doing science research. It is also called positivist/postpositivist research, empirical
science, and postpositivism. This last term is called postpositivism because it represents the thinking
after positivism, challenging the traditional notion of the absolute truth of knowledge (Phillips & Burbules,
2000) and recognizing that we cannot be certain about our claims of knowledge when studying the
behavior and actions of humans. The postpositivist tradition comes from 19th-century writers such as
Comte, Mill, Durkheim, Newton, and Locke (Smith, 1983) and more recently from writers such as Phillips
and Burbules (2000).
Those who hold a postpositivist worldview hold a deterministic philosophy that causes (probably)
determine effects or outcomes. Thus, the problems studied by postpositivists reflect the need to identify
and assess the causes that influence outcomes, such as those found in experiments. It is also
reductionistic in that the intent is to reduce the ideas into a small, discrete set to test, such as the

--- Page 42 ---
variables that comprise hypotheses and research questions. Careful observation and measurement of the
objective reality “out there” in the world represent a postpositivist lens. Thus, developing numeric
measures of observations and studying the behavior of individuals become paramount for a postpositivist.
Finally, laws or theories govern the world, and these theories need to be tested, verified, and refined so
that we can understand the world. Thus, in the scientific method—the accepted approach to research by
postpositivists—a researcher begins with a theory, collects data that either supports or refutes the
theory, and then makes necessary revisions and conducts additional tests.
In reading Phillips and Burbules (2000), you can gain a sense of the key assumptions of this position,
such as the following:
Knowledge is conjectural (and antifoundational)—absolute truth can never be found.
Thus, evidence established in research is always imperfect and fallible. For this reason, researchers
state that they do not prove a hypothesis; instead, they indicate a failure to reject the hypothesis.
Research is the process of making claims and then refining or abandoning some of them for other
claims more strongly warranted. Most quantitative research, for example, starts with the test of a
theory.
Data, evidence, and rational considerations shape knowledge. In practice, the researcher collects
information on instruments based on measures completed by the participants or by observations
recorded by the researcher.
Research seeks to develop relevant, true statements that explain the situation of concern or that
describe the causal relationships of interest. In quantitative studies, researchers advance the
relationships among variables and pose these as questions or hypotheses.
Being objective is an essential aspect of competent inquiry; researchers must examine methods and
conclusions for bias. For example, standards of validity and reliability are important in quantitative
research.
The Constructivist Worldview
Others hold a different worldview. A constructivist or social constructivist worldview (often combined with
interpretivism) is a philosophical position used in qualitative research. The ideas came from Mannheim
and from works such as Berger and Luckmann’s (1967) The Social Construction of Reality and Lincoln
and Guba’s (1985) Naturalistic Inquiry. More recent writers who have summarized this position are
Lincoln et al. (2011), Mertens (2010), and Crotty (1998), among others. Those who hold a
constructivist worldview believe that individuals seek understanding of the world in which they live and
work. Individuals develop subjective meanings of their experiences—meanings directed toward certain
objects or things. These meanings are varied and multiple, leading the researcher to look for the
complexity of views rather than narrowing meanings into a few categories or ideas. The goal of the
research relies as much as possible on the participants’ views of the situation. The questions become
broad and general so that the participants can construct the meaning of a situation, typically forged in
discussions or interactions with other persons. The more open-ended the questioning, the better because
the researcher listens carefully to what people say or do in their life settings. Often these subjective
meanings are negotiated socially and historically. They are not simply imprinted on individuals but are
formed through interaction with others (hence social constructivism) and through historical and cultural
norms that operate in individuals’ lives. Thus, constructivist researchers often address the processes of
interaction among individuals. They also focus on the specific contexts in which people live and work to
understand the historical and cultural settings of the participants. Researchers recognize that their own
backgrounds shape their interpretations, and they position themselves in the research to acknowledge
how their interpretations flow from their personal, cultural, and historical experiences. The researcher’s
intent is to make sense of (or interpret) the meanings others have about the world. Rather than starting
with a theory (as in postpositivism), inquirers generate or inductively develop a theory or pattern of
meaning.
For example, in discussing constructivism, Crotty (1998) identified several assumptions:

--- Page 43 ---
Human beings construct meanings as they engage with the world they are interpreting. Qualitative
researchers tend to use open-ended questions so that the participants can share their views.
Humans engage with their world and make sense of it based on their historical and social
perspectives—we are all born into a world of meaning bestowed upon us by our culture. Thus,
qualitative researchers seek to understand the context or setting of the participants through visiting
this context and gathering information personally. They also interpret what they find, an interpretation
shaped by the researcher’s own experiences and background.
The basic generation of meaning is always social, arising in and out of interaction with a human
community. The process of qualitative research is largely inductive; the inquirer generates meaning
from the data collected in the field.
The Transformative Worldview
Another group of researchers holds to the philosophical assumptions of the transformative approach. This
position arose during the 1980s and 1990s from individuals who felt that the postpositivist assumptions
imposed structural laws and theories that did not fit marginalized individuals in our society or issues of
power and social justice, discrimination, and oppression. There is no uniform body of literature
characterizing this worldview, but it includes groups of researchers that are critical theorists, participatory
action researchers, community-based participatory researchers, Marxists, feminists, and racial and ethnic
minorities. It also includes persons with disabilities, indigenous and postcolonial peoples, and members of
the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, and queer communities. Historically, the transformative writers
have drawn on the works of Marx, Adorno, Marcuse, Habermas, and Freire (Neuman, 2009). Fay (1987),
Heron and Reason (1997), Kemmis and Wilkinson (1998), Kemmis and McTaggart (2000), and Mertens
(2009, 2010) are additional authors writing about this perspective.
In the main, these inquirers felt that the constructivist stance did not go far enough in advocating for an
action agenda to help marginalized people. A transformative worldview holds that research inquiry
needs to be intertwined with politics and a political change agenda to confront social oppression at
whatever levels it occurs (Mertens, 2010). Thus, the research contains an action agenda for reform that
may change the lives of the participants, the institutions in which individuals work or live, and the
researcher’s life. Moreover, researchers need to address specific important social issues of the day,
issues such as empowerment, inequality, oppression, domination, suppression, and alienation. The
researcher often begins with one of these issues as the focal point of the study. This research also
assumes that the inquirer will proceed collaboratively to not further marginalize the participants as a result
of the inquiry. In this sense, the participants may help design questions, collect data, analyze information,
or reap the rewards of the research. Transformative research provides a voice for these participants,
raising their consciousness or advancing an agenda for change to improve their lives. It becomes a united
voice for reform and change.
This philosophical worldview focuses on the needs of groups and individuals in our society that may be
marginalized or disenfranchised. Therefore, theoretical perspectives may be integrated with philosophical
assumptions that construct a picture of the issues being examined, the people studied, and the changes
needed, such as in feminist perspectives, racialized discourses, critical theory, queer theory, and
disability theory. An important development around the world has been the expansion of interest in
indigenous methodologies that respect and honor the culture of individuals being studied. For example, in
a study in Botswana, Chilisa and Tsheko (2014) discussed the importance of attending to cultural
language of participants (e.g., gestures, tones, expressions) and using conversational modes of data
collection (e.g., talking circles, storying). Also important is seeking out “knowers” of the language for
proverbs, myths, and folktales, including participants as co-researchers, and engaging in respectful
principles of accountability toward the participants.
Although these are diverse groups and our explanations here are generalizations, it is helpful to view the
summary by Mertens (2010) of key features of the transformative worldview or paradigm:
It places central importance on the study of lives and experiences of diverse groups that have
traditionally been marginalized. For these groups, their lives have been constrained by oppressors,
leading to strategies to resist, challenge, and subvert these constraints.

--- Page 44 ---
In studying these diverse groups, the researcher focuses on inequities based on gender, race,
ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation, and socioeconomic class that result in asymmetric power
relationships.
The research in the transformative worldview links political and social action to these inequities.
Transformative research uses a program theory of beliefs about how a program works and why the
problems of oppression, domination, and power relationships exist.
The Pragmatic Worldview
Another position about worldviews comes from the pragmatists. Pragmatism derives from the work of
Peirce, James, Mead, and Dewey (Cherryholmes, 1992). Other writers include Murphy (1990), Patton
(1990), and Rorty (1990). There are many forms of a pragmatic worldview, but it arises out of actions,
situations, and consequences rather than antecedent conditions (as in postpositivism). There is a concern
with applications—what works—and solutions to problems (Patton, 1990). Instead of focusing on
methods, researchers emphasize the research problem and question and use all approaches available to
understand the problem (see Rossman & Wilson, 1985). As a philosophical underpinning for mixed
methods studies, Morgan (2007), Patton (1990), and Tashakkori and Teddlie (2010) convey its
importance for focusing attention on the research problem in social science research and then using
pluralistic approaches to gather data about the problem. Using Cherryholmes (1992), Morgan (2007),
and our own views, pragmatism provides a philosophical basis for research:
Pragmatism is not committed to any one system of philosophy and reality. This idea applies to mixed
methods research in that inquirers draw liberally from both quantitative and qualitative assumptions
when they engage in their research.
Individual researchers have a freedom of choice. In this way, researchers are free to choose the
methods, techniques, and procedures of research that best meet their needs and purposes.
Pragmatists do not see the world as an absolute unity. In a similar way, mixed methods researchers
look to many approaches for collecting and analyzing data rather than subscribing to only one way
(e.g., quantitative or qualitative).
Truth is what works at the time. It is not based in a duality between reality independent of the mind
or within the mind. Thus, in mixed methods research, investigators use both quantitative and
qualitative data because they provide the best understanding of a research problem.
The pragmatist researchers look to the what and how to research based on the intended
consequences. Mixed methods researchers need to establish a purpose for their mixing, a rationale
for reasons why quantitative and qualitative data need to be mixed in the first place.
Pragmatists agree that research always occurs in social, historical, political, and other contexts. In
this way, mixed methods studies may include a postmodern turn, a theoretical lens that reflects
social justice and political aims.
Pragmatists believe in an external world independent of the mind as well as that lodged in the mind.
But they believe that we need to stop asking questions about reality and the laws of nature
(Cherryholmes, 1992). “They would simply like to change the subject” (Rorty, 1990, p. xiv).
Thus, for the mixed methods researcher, pragmatism opens the door to multiple methods, different
worldviews, assumptions, and forms of data collection and analysis.
Research Designs
Of the three-part framework—philosophical assumptions, research designs, and research methods—our
focus now turns to the second element, the research designs. The researcher not only selects a
qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods study to conduct; the inquirer also decides on a type of study
design within these three choices. Research designs are types of inquiry within qualitative, quantitative,
and mixed methods approaches that provide specific direction for procedures in a research study. Others

--- Page 45 ---
have called them strategies of inquiry (Denzin & Lincoln, 2011). The designs available to the researcher
have grown over the years as computer technology has advanced our data analysis, our ability to analyze
complex models, and our capacity to engage in new procedures for conducting social science research.
Select types will be emphasized in the methods discussions of Chapters 8, 9, and 10, types frequently
used in the social and health sciences. Here we introduce the designs that will be discussed later and that
are cited in examples throughout the book. An overview of these designs is shown in Table 1.3.
Table 1.3 Alternative Research Designs
Qualitative
Quantitative Designs Methods Designs
Designs
Experimental and quasi- Descriptive Convergent
experimental method
Explanatory sequential
Single-subject Narrative
research Exploratory sequential
Nonexperimental such as
surveys Phenomenology Complex designs with embedded
core designs
Longitudinal Grounded
theory
Ethnography
Case study
Quantitative Designs
During the late 19th and throughout the 20th century, designs associated with quantitative research
invoked the postpositivist worldview and originated mainly in physiology and psychology. These include
true experiments and quasi-experiments (see an original, early treatise on this, Campbell & Stanley,
1963). An additional experimental design is applied behavioral analysis or single-subject experiments.
This type of experiment involves a treatment administered over time to a single individual or a small
number of individuals (Cooper et al., 2007; Neuman & McCormick, 1995). One type of nonexperimental
quantitative research is causal-comparative research. The investigator compares two or more groups in
terms of a cause (or independent variable) that has already happened. Another nonexperimental form of
research is the correlational design in which investigators use the correlational statistic to describe and
measure the degree or association (or relationship) between two or more variables or sets of scores
(Creswell & Guetterman, 2018). These designs involve more complex relationships among variables
found in techniques of structural equation modeling, hierarchical linear modeling, and logistic regression.
More recently, quantitative strategies have involved complex experiments with many variables and
treatments (e.g., factorial designs and repeated measure designs). Designs often employ longitudinal
data collection over time to examine the development of ideas and trends. Designs have also included
elaborate structural equation models that incorporate causal paths and the identification of the collective
strength of multiple variables. Rather than discuss these quantitative approaches, we will focus in this
book on two primary designs: surveys and experiments.

--- Page 46 ---
Survey research provides a quantitative or numeric description of a population’s trends, attitudes,
or opinions by studying a sample of that population. It includes cross-sectional and longitudinal
studies using questionnaires or structured interviews for data collection to generalize from a sample
to a population (Fowler, 2008).
Experimental research seeks to determine if a specific treatment influences an outcome. The
researcher assesses this by providing a specific treatment to one group, withholding it from another,
and then determining how both groups scored on an outcome. Experiments include true experiments,
the random assignment of subjects to treatment conditions, and quasi-experiments that use
nonrandomized assignments (Keppel, 1991). Included experiments are single-subject designs in
which a single individual or group is observed over a period of time and interventions administered
and then withheld (Gast & Ledford, 2014).
Qualitative Designs
In qualitative research, the numbers and types of approaches have also become more clearly visible
during the 1990s and into the 21st century. The historic origin for qualitative research comes from
anthropology, sociology, the humanities, and evaluation. Books have summarized the various types, and
complete procedures are now available on specific qualitative inquiry approaches (Creswell & Poth,
2018). For example, Clandinin and Connelly (2000) constructed a picture of what narrative researchers
do. Moustakas (1994) discussed the philosophical tenets and the procedures of the phenomenological
method; Charmaz (2006), Corbin and Strauss (2007, 2015), and Strauss and Corbin (1990, 1998)
identified the procedures of grounded theory. Fetterman (2010) and Wolcott (2008) summarized
ethnographic procedures and the many faces and research strategies of ethnography, and Stake (1995)
and Yin (2009, 2012, 2014) suggested processes involved in case study research. In this book,
illustrations are drawn from the following qualitative designs, recognizing that approaches such as
participatory action research (Kemmis & McTaggart, 2000), discourse analysis (Cheek, 2004), and
others not mentioned are also viable ways to conduct qualitative studies:
Descriptive method in qualitative research is an approach to analysis where the researcher stays
close to the data, uses limited frameworks and interpretation for explaining the data, and catalogues
the information into themes.
Narrative research is a design of inquiry from the humanities in which the researcher studies the
lives of individuals and asks one or more participants to provide stories about their lives (Riessman,
2008). This information is then often retold or restoried by the researcher into a narrative chronology.
Often, in the end, the narrative combines views from the participant’s life with those of the
researcher’s life in a collaborative narrative (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000).
Phenomenological research is a design of inquiry coming from philosophy and psychology in which
the researcher describes the lived experiences of individuals about a phenomenon as described by
participants. This description culminates in the essence of several individuals who have all
experienced the phenomenon. This design has strong philosophical underpinnings and typically
involves conducting interviews (Giorgi, 2009; Moustakas, 1994).
Grounded theory is a design of inquiry from sociology in which the researcher derives a general,
abstract theory of a process, action, or interaction grounded in the views of participants. This
process involves using multiple stages of data collection and the refinement and interrelationship of
categories of information to form a theory (Charmaz, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 2007, 2015).
Ethnography is a design of inquiry coming from anthropology and sociology. The researcher studies
the shared patterns of behaviors, language, and actions of an intact cultural group in a natural setting
over a prolonged period of time. Data collection often involves observations and interviews (Wolcott,
1994).
Case studies are a design of inquiry found in many fields, especially evaluation, in which the
researcher develops an in-depth analysis of a case, often a program, event, activity, process, or one
or more individuals. Cases are bounded by time and place (or setting), and researchers collect
detailed information using a variety of data collection procedures over a sustained period of time
(Stake, 1995; Yin, 2009, 2012, 2014).

--- Page 47 ---
Mixed Methods Designs
Mixed methods research involves collecting quantitative and qualitative data and combining or integrating
the data to yield insights or inferences from the combined data. Qualitative data tends to be open-ended
without predetermined responses, whereas quantitative data usually includes closed-ended responses
such as those found on questionnaires or psychological instruments. As we know it today, the field of
mixed methods research began in the middle to late 1980s. Its origins, however, go back further. In 1959,
Campbell and Fisk used multiple methods to study psychological traits—although their methods were only
quantitative measures. Their work prompted others to collect multiple forms of data, such as
observations and interviews (qualitative data) with traditional surveys (Sieber, 1973). Early thoughts
about the value of multiple methods—called mixed methods—resided in the idea that all methods had
bias and weaknesses. The collection of both quantitative and qualitative data neutralized the weaknesses
of each form of data. Combining data sources—a means for seeking convergence across qualitative and
quantitative methods—was born (Jick, 1979). By the early 1990s, mixed methods turned toward the
systematic integration of quantitative and qualitative data and the idea of ways to combine the data
through different types of research designs. These types of designs were extensively discussed in a
major handbook addressing the field in 2003 and reissued in 2010 (Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2010).
As the field developed, specific mixed methods designs emerged complete with diagrams to help the
reader understand the designs (Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018; Creswell, 2022). Practical issues are
being widely discussed today in terms of examples of “good” mixed methods studies and evaluative
criteria, the use of teams to conduct this form of inquiry, and the expansion of mixed methods worldwide.
Although many designs exist in the mixed methods field, this book will focus on the three primary designs,
called core design, and several complex designs that involve the embedding of core designs into
processes or frameworks.
A convergent mixed methods design is a core form of mixed methods design. The researcher
converges or merges quantitative and qualitative data to provide a comprehensive analysis of the
research problem. In this design, the investigator typically collects both forms of data at roughly the
same time and then integrates the information in the interpretation of the overall results.
Contradictions or incongruent findings are explained or further probed in this design.
An explanatory sequential mixed methods design is a core design in which the researcher first
conducts quantitative research, analyzes the results, and then builds on the results to explain them in
more detail with qualitative research. It is considered explanatory because the initial quantitative data
results are explained further with the qualitative data. It has a sequential structure because the initial
quantitative phase follows the qualitative phase. This type of design is popular in fields with a strong
quantitative orientation (because the project begins with quantitative research), but it presents
challenges of identifying the quantitative results and explaining the sample selection process in the
study.
An exploratory sequential mixed methods design is the reverse sequence from the explanatory
sequential design. In the exploratory sequential design the researcher first begins with a qualitative
research phase and explores the views of participants. The data are then analyzed and the
information used to build into a second, quantitative phase. The qualitative phase may be used in
several ways. It can help build an instrument that best fits the sample under study, identify
appropriate instruments to use in the follow-up quantitative phase, and develop an intervention for an
experiment. The qualitative phase can also help design an app or website or to specify variables that
need to go into a follow-up quantitative study. Challenges to this design reside in focusing in on the
appropriate qualitative findings to use in the quantitative design and the sample selection for both
phases of research.
A complex mixed methods design involves embedding one or more core designs into a framework
or a process. For example, the core designs can augment an experiment by collecting qualitative
data after the experiment to help explain the quantitative outcome results. The core designs can be
used within a case study framework to deductively document cases or to generate cases for further
analysis. The core designs can inform a theoretical study drawn from social justice (see Chapter 3)
as an overarching perspective within a design that contains both quantitative and qualitative data.
The core designs can also be used in the different phases of an evaluation procedure that spans
from a needs assessment to a test of a program or experimental intervention.

--- Page 48 ---
Research Methods
The third major element in the philosophy-design-methods framework is the specific research methods
that involve the forms of data collection, analysis, and interpretation that researchers propose for their
studies. As shown in Table 1.4, it is useful to consider the full range of possibilities of data collection and
to organize these methods, for example, by their degree of predetermined nature, their use of closed-
ended versus open-ended questioning, and their focus on numeric versus nonnumeric data analysis.
These methods will be developed further in Chapters 8 through 10.
Researchers collect data on an instrument or test (e.g., a set of questions about attitudes toward self-
esteem) or gather information on a behavioral checklist (e.g., observation of a worker engaged in a
complex skill). On the other end of the continuum, collecting data might involve visiting a research site and
observing the behavior of individuals without predetermined questions or conducting an interview in which
the individual talks openly about a topic, largely without the use of specific questions. The choice of
methods turns on whether the intent is to specify the type of information to be collected in advance of the
study or to allow it to emerge from participants in the project. Also, the type of data analyzed may be
numeric information gathered on scales of instruments or text information recording and reporting the
voice of the participants. Researchers make interpretations of the statistical results, or they interpret the
themes or patterns that emerge from the data. In some forms of research, both quantitative and
qualitative data are collected, analyzed, and interpreted. Instrument data may be augmented with open-
ended observations, or census data may be followed by in-depth exploratory interviews. In this case of
mixing methods, the researcher makes inferences across both the quantitative and qualitative databases.
Table 1.4 Quantitative, Mixed, and Qualitative Methods
Quantitative Methods Mixed Methods Qualitative Methods
Predetermined Both predetermined and Emerging methods
emerging methods
Instrument-based questions Both open- and closed- Open-ended questions
ended questions
Performance data, attitude data, Multiple forms of data Interview data, observation data,
observational data, and census data drawing on all document data, and audiovisual data
possibilities
Statistical analysis Statistical and text Text and image analysis
analysis
Statistical interpretation Across databases Themes, patterns, and interpretation
interpretation

--- Page 49 ---
INTERCONNECTING WORLDVIEWS, DESIGNS, AND METHODS
The worldviews, the designs, and the methods all contribute to a research approach that tends to be
quantitative, qualitative, or mixed. Table 1.5 creates distinctions that may be useful in choosing an
approach. This table also includes practices of all three approaches that we emphasize in the remaining
chapters of this book.
Typical scenarios of research can illustrate how these three elements combine into a research design.
Example 1. Quantitative Approach: Postpositivist Worldview, Experimental Design, and Pretest
and Posttest Measures of Attitudes
In this scenario, the researcher tests a theory by specifying narrow hypotheses and the
collection of data to support or refute the hypotheses. The researcher uses an experimental
design to assess attitudes both before and after an experimental treatment. The data are
collected on an instrument that measures attitudes, and the information is analyzed using
statistical data analysis procedures and hypothesis testing.
Table 1.5 Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Approaches
Tends to or Quantitative
Qualitative Approaches Mixed Methods Approaches
Typically Approaches
Uses these Constructivist/transformative Postpositivist Pragmatic knowledge claims
philosophical knowledge claims knowledge claims
assumptions

--- Page 50 ---
Tends to or Quantitative
Qualitative Approaches Mixed Methods Approaches
Typically Approaches
Employs Phenomenology, grounded
these theory, ethnography, case
designs study, and narrative
Surveys and Sequential, convergent, and
experiments (true, complex designs
quasi-experimental,
single-subject)
Employs Open-ended questions, Closed-ended Both open- and closed-ended
these emerging approaches, text questions, questions, both emerging and
methods or image data predetermined predetermined approaches,
approaches, numeric and both quantitative and
data (may include qualitative data and analysis
some open-ended
questions)
Uses these Positions themselves Tests or verifies Collects both quantitative and
practices of theories or explanations qualitative data
research Collects participant
meanings Identifies variables to Develops a rationale for mixing
study
Focuses on a single Integrates the data at different
concept or phenomenon Relates variables in stages of inquiry
questions or
Brings personal values into hypotheses Presents visual pictures of the
the study procedures in the study
Uses standards of
Studies the context or validity and reliability Employs the practices of both
setting of participants qualitative and quantitative
Observes and research
Validates the accuracy of measures information
findings numerically
Makes interpretations of the Uses unbiased
data approaches
Creates an agenda for Employs statistical
change or reform procedures
Collaborates with the
participants
Employs text analysis
procedures
Example 2. Qualitative Approach: Constructivist Worldview, Ethnographic Design, and
Observation of Behavior
In this situation, the researcher seeks to establish the meaning of a phenomenon from participants’
views. This means identifying a culture-sharing group and studying how it develops shared patterns
of behavior over time (i.e., ethnography). One of the key elements of collecting data in this way is to
observe participants’ behaviors during their engagement in activities.

--- Page 51 ---
Example 3. Qualitative Approach: Transformative Worldview, Narrative Design, and Open-Ended
Interviewing
For this study, the inquirer seeks to examine an issue related to oppression of individuals. To study
this, the researcher collects stories about individual oppression using a narrative approach.
Individuals are interviewed to determine how they have personally experienced oppression.
Example 4. Mixed Methods Approach: Pragmatic Worldview, Collection of Both Quantitative and
Qualitative Data Sequentially in the Design
The researcher bases the inquiry on the assumption that collecting diverse types of data best
provides a more complete understanding of a research problem than quantitative or qualitative data
alone. The study begins with a broad survey to generalize results to a population and then, in a
second phase, focuses on qualitative, open-ended interviews to collect detailed views from
participants to help explain the initial quantitative survey.
CRITERIA FOR SELECTING A RESEARCH APPROACH
Given the possibility of qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods approaches, what factors affect a
choice of one approach over another for the design of a proposal? To make this choice, we need to add
to worldview, design, and methods the research problem, the personal experiences of the researcher,
and the audience(s) for the report.
The Research Problem and Questions
A research problem, more thoroughly discussed in Chapter 5, is an issue or concern that needs to be
addressed (e.g., the issue of racial discrimination). The problem comes from voids, conflicts in research
results, and topics neglected in the literature. It also can arise from the need to emphasize the voice of
marginalized participants and real-life problems found in the workplace, the home, the community.
Certain types of social research problems call for specific approaches. For example, if the problem
requires for (a) the identification of factors that influence an outcome, (b) the utility of an intervention, or
(c) understanding the best predictors of outcomes, then a quantitative approach is best. It is also the
best approach to use to test a theory or explanation. On the other hand, if a concept or phenomenon
needs to be explored and understood because little research has been done on it or involves an
understudied sample, it merits a qualitative approach. Qualitative research is especially useful when the
researcher does not know the important research questions or variables to examine. This type of
approach may be needed because the topic is new, the subject has never been addressed with a certain
sample or group of people, and existing theories do not apply with the sample or group under study
(Morse, 1991). A mixed methods design is useful when the quantitative or qualitative approach, each by
itself, is inadequate to study a research problem and the strengths of both quantitative and qualitative
research (and its data) can provide the best understanding. For example, a researcher may want to
generalize the findings to a population and develop a detailed view of the meaning of a phenomenon or
concept for individuals. In this research, the inquirer first explores to learn what variables to study and
then examines them with a large sample of individuals. Alternatively, researchers may first survey a large
number of individuals and then follow up with a few participants to obtain their specific views and their
voices about the topic. In these situations, collecting both closed-ended quantitative data and open-ended
qualitative data proves advantageous.
Personal Experiences
Researchers’ personal training and experiences also influence their choice of approach. An individual
trained in technical, scientific writing, statistics, and computer statistical programs and familiar with
quantitative journals in the library would most likely choose the quantitative design. In contrast, individuals
who enjoy writing in a storytelling or literary way, conducting personal interviews, or making up-close
observations may gravitate to the qualitative approach. The mixed methods researcher is an individual

--- Page 52 ---
familiar with both quantitative and qualitative research. This person also has the time and resources to
collect and analyze both quantitative and qualitative data.
Because quantitative studies are the traditional mode of research, carefully worked out procedures and
rules exist for them. Researchers may be more comfortable with the highly structured procedures of
quantitative research. Also, it can be uncomfortable for some individuals to challenge accepted
approaches among some faculty by using qualitative and transformative approaches to inquiry. In
contrast, qualitative approaches allow room to be innovative and to work more within researcher-
designed frameworks. They allow more creative, literary-style writing, a form that individuals may like to
use. For those researchers undertaking social justice or community involvement studies, a qualitative
approach is typically best, although this form of research may also incorporate mixed methods designs.
For the mixed methods researcher, the project will take extra time because of the need to collect and
analyze both quantitative and qualitative data. It fits a person who enjoys and has the skills in quantitative,
qualitative research, and mixed methods research.
Audience
Finally, researchers write for audiences that will accept their research. These audiences may be journal
editors and readers, faculty committees, conference attendees, or colleagues in the field. Students
should consider the approaches typically supported and used by their advisers. The experiences of these
audiences with quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods studies can shape the decision made about the
choice of design.
Summary
In designing a research proposal or a research project, start by understanding the definitions for
philosophical assumptions, research approach (or methodology), research design, and research
method. Understand that this book will address three broad approaches to inquiry: quantitative,
qualitative, and mixed methods. Then, a framework is helpful to proceed with a study. This
framework involves understanding the philosophical assumptions the researcher brings to a study;
the designs or procedures available in quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research; and
the specific methods to be used. In choosing a specific design for a project, consider these three
components. In addition, a choice of approach involves the research problem or issue being
studied, the personal experiences of the researcher, and the audience for whom the researcher
writes.
KEY TERMS
Case studies 15
Complex mixed methods design 17
Constructivist worldview 9
Convergent mixed methods design 16
Descriptive method 15
Ethnography 15
Experimental research 14
Explanatory sequential mixed methods design 16
Exploratory sequential mixed methods design 17
Grounded theory 15

--- Page 53 ---
Mixed methods research 5
Narrative research 15
Phenomenological research 15
Philosophical assumptions 4
Postpositivist worldview 8
Pragmatic worldview 11
Qualitative research 5
Quantitative research 5
Research approach 4
Research design 4
Research methods 4
Survey research 14
Transformative worldview 10
Worldview 7
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Why are philosophical assumptions necessary as a prerequisite for conducting a research
study? What philosophical approach best fits your research project?
2. Discuss your choice of a research approach—quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods—for
your study. Why did you choose it?
3. What are the distinctions among the quantitative research, qualitative research, and mixed
methods research approaches?
Additional Readings
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspective in the research
process. SAGE.
A hierarchical relationship exists among philosophy, theory, methodology, and methods. Michael
Crotty offers a useful framework to see these relationships. He ties together the many
epistemological issues, theoretical perspectives, methodology, and methods of social research.
He interrelates the four components of the research process and shows a representative
sampling of topics of each component. He then goes on to discuss nine different theoretical
orientations in social research, such as postmodernism, feminism, critical inquiry, interpretivism,
constructionism, and positivism.
Lincoln, Y. S., Lynham, S. A., & Guba, E. G. (2011). Paradigmatic controversies, contradictions,
and emerging confluences revisited. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln, The SAGE handbook of
qualitative research (4th ed., pp. 97–128). SAGE
Philosophical assumptions are often confusing to researchers and need to be carefully studied.
Yvonna Lincoln, Susan Lynham, and Egon Guba have provided distinctions among the different
philosophical positions. They advance the basic beliefs of five alternative inquiry paradigms in

--- Page 54 ---
y y g
social science research: (a) positivism, (b) postpositivism, (c) critical theory, (d) constructivism,
and (e) participatory. These extend the earlier analysis provided in the first and second editions of
the handbook. Each is presented in terms of ontology (i.e., nature of reality), epistemology (i.e.,
how we know what we know), and methodology (i.e., the process of research). The participatory
paradigm adds another alternative paradigm to those originally advanced in the first edition. After
briefly presenting these five approaches, they contrast them in terms of several issues, such as
the nature of knowledge, how knowledge accumulates, and goodness or quality criteria.
Mertens, D. (2009). Transformative research and evaluation. Guilford.
In many countries around the world, a transformative research approach helps establish change in
communities and groups. Donna Mertens provides a guide for this transformation. She has
devoted an entire text to advancing the transformative paradigm and the process of
transformative research. She discusses the basic features of the transformative paradigm as an
umbrella term, provides examples of groups affiliated with this paradigm, and links the paradigm
to quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods approaches. In this book, she also discusses the
research procedures of sampling, consent, reciprocity, data collection methods and instruments,
data analysis and interpretation, and reporting.
Phillips, D. C., & Burbules, N. C. (2000). Postpositivism and educational research. Rowman &
Littlefield.
In research, the philosophy behind quantitative research is typically neither expressed in studies
nor well-known. Thus, it is helpful for D. C. Phillips and Nicholas Burbules to summarize the major
ideas of postpositivist thinking. Through two chapters, “What Is Postpositivism?” and
“Philosophical Commitments of Postpositivist Researchers,” the authors advance major ideas
about postpositivism and differentiate it from positivism. Postpositivism suggests that human
knowledge is conjectural rather than unchallengeable and that our warrants for knowledge can be
withdrawn through further investigations.
Shannon-Baker, P. (2016). Making paradigms meaningful in mixed methods research. Journal of
Mixed Methods Research. 10(4), 319–334.
Understanding the specific elements used to describe different worldviews helps a researcher
apply the worldview to their study. Peggy Shannon-Baker provides a useful, current assessment
of four paradigms (or worldviews): pragmatism, transformative-emancipation, dialectics, and
critical realism. Granted, she does not cover the many possibilities used today, and her
assessment of paradigms focuses on applications in mixed methods research. However, her
discussion of the elements of the paradigms and how they can be applied in research makes an
important contribution to the area of philosophical assumptions in research.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
Philosophical worldviews, designs, and research methods are interconnected with one another. Research
approaches are in the middle. The types under each element are as follows.
Philosophical worldviews:
Postpositivist
Constructivist
Transformative
Pragmatic
Designs:

--- Page 55 ---
Quantitative, for example, Experiments
Qualitative, for example, Ethnographies
Mixed Methods, for example, Explanatory Sequential
Research methods:
Questions
Data Collection
Data Analysis
Interpretation
Validation
Research approaches:
Qualitative
Quantitative
Mixed Methods

--- Page 56 ---
CHAPTER 2 REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Explain the reasons for a literature review to defend its use in a study.
2. Organize a literature review consistent with a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods
approach.
3. Describe the steps typically undertaken when conducting a literature review.
4. Explain how to evaluate literature for inclusion in a literature review.
5. Identify the most frequently used style conventions from APA used in a research study.
6. Identify the types of terms needing definition in a scholarly research report.
INTRODUCTION
Besides selecting a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods approach, a first step in conducting
research is to identify a topic and review the literature written about it. This chapter continues the
discussion about understanding preliminary considerations before launching into a proposal or project. It
begins with a discussion about selecting a topic by drafting a title for a study and then determining
whether the topic is significant. Then, the chapter addresses the purpose of a literature review and its
structural differences for a qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods study. Next, the chapter addresses
criteria for evaluating the quality of the literature. We also present several steps typically undertaken by
researchers during the literature review process. Within these steps, the researcher searches databases,
prioritizes the importance of literature, writes abstracts (or takes notes), and evaluates the quality of the
literature. A literature map can help organize the information. We also recommend following closely the
American Psychological Association Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020) for
important style guides and defining terms when they first appear in a proposal or study.
THE RESEARCH TOPIC
Before considering what literature to use in a project, identify a topic to study and reflect on whether it is
practical and useful to undertake the study. The topic is the subject or subject matter of a proposed
study, such as “faculty teaching,” “organizational creativity,” or “psychological stress.” Describe the topic
in a few words or in a short phrase. The topic becomes the central idea to learn about or to explore in a
study.
A Draft Title
There are several ways that researchers gain some insight into their topics when they initially plan their
research (we assume that the topic is chosen by the researcher and not by an adviser or committee
member). One way is to draft a brief working title to the study. We are surprised how often researchers
fail to draft a title early in the development of their projects. In our opinion, the working or draft title
becomes a major road sign in research—a tangible idea that the researcher refocuses as the project
goes on (see Glesne, 2015; Glesne & Peshkin, 1992). It becomes an orienting device. We find that, in
our research, this topic provides a central focus for the study and serves as an identifier for others
reading or hearing about the subject. When students provide their research project ideas, we often ask
them to supply a working title if they do not already have one completed.
How would this working title be written? Try completing this sentence: “My study is about . . .” A
response might be, “My study is about at-risk children in the junior high,” or “My study is about helping
college faculty become better researchers.” Consider framing a response so that another scholar might
easily grasp the meaning of the project. A common shortcoming of beginning researchers is stating their
title in complex and erudite language. This perspective often results from reading published articles that
present a clean, clear message. However, like all research, they undergo extensive revisions before

--- Page 57 ---
being set in print. Good, sound research projects begin with straightforward, uncomplicated thoughts that
readers can easily understand. Think about a journal article that you have read recently. If it was easy
and quick to read, it was likely written in general language understandable to many readers. It was
straightforward in overall design and conceptualization. As a project develops, it will become more
complicated, but it should not start in a complex way.
Wilkinson (1991) provided useful advice for creating a title: Be brief and avoid wasting words. Eliminate
unnecessary words, such as “An Approach to . . . ,” “A Study of . . . ,” and so forth. Use a single title or a
double title. An example of a double title would be “An Ethnography: Understanding a Child’s Perception
of War.” In addition to Wilkinson’s thoughts, consider a title no longer than 10 to 12 words, eliminate most
articles and prepositions, and include the focus or topic of the study.
In addition to writing a draft title, another strategy for topic development is to pose the topic as a brief
question. What question needs to be answered in the proposed study? A researcher might ask, “What
treatment is best for depression?” “What does it mean to be Arabic in U.S. society today?” “What brings
people to tourist sites in Hawaii?” When drafting questions, focus on the question’s key topic as the major
signpost, and consider how to refine the topic to be descriptive of the study (see Chapters 6 and 7 on the
purpose statement and research questions and hypotheses).
A Significant Topic
Actively elevating this topic to a research study calls for reflecting on whether the topic can and should
be researched. A topic can be researched if a researcher has participants willing to serve in the study. It
also can be researched if the investigator has resources such as collecting data over a sustained time
and using available computer programs to help in the analysis of data.
The question of should is a more complex matter. Several factors go into this decision. Perhaps the most
important is whether the topic adds to the pool of research knowledge in the literature available on the
topic. It might also replicate past studies, lift the voices of underrepresented groups or individuals, help
address social justice, or transform the ideas and beliefs of researchers.
A first step in any project is to spend considerable time in the library examining the research on a topic.
This point cannot be overemphasized. Beginning researchers may advance a great study that is complete
in every way, such as in the clarity of research questions, the comprehensiveness of data collection, and
the sophistication of statistical analysis. But the researcher may garner little support from faculty
committees or conference planners because the study does not add anything new to the body of
research. Ask, “How does this project contribute to the literature?” Consider how the study might address
an unexamined topic, extend the discussion by incorporating new elements, or replicate (or repeat) a
study in new situations or with new participants. Contributing to the literature may also mean how the
study adds to an understanding of a theory or extends a theory (see Chapter 3). It can also mean
providing a new perspective or “angle” to the existing literature. For example, the new angle might be one
of these:
Studying an unusual location (e.g., rural America)
Examining an unusual group of participants (e.g., refugees)
Taking an unexpected perspective that reverses an expectation (e.g., why marriages do work rather
than do not work)
Providing novel means of collecting data (e.g., collect sounds)
Presenting results in unusual ways (e.g., graphs that depict geographical locations)
Studying a timely topic (e.g., immigration issues) (Creswell & Bàez, 2020)
The issue of should the topic be studied also relates to whether anyone outside of the researcher’s own
immediate institution or environment would be interested in the topic. Given choosing a topic that might be
of limited regional interest or one of national interest, we opt for the latter because it has wide appeal to
a broad audience. Journal editors, committee members, conference planners, and funding agencies can
appreciate research that reaches a broad audience. Finally, the topic may relate to the researcher’s

--- Page 58 ---
personal goals. Consider the time it takes to complete a project, revise it, and disseminate the results. All
researchers should consider how the study and its heavy commitment of time will pay off. It may pay off
in enhancing career goals, conducting more research, obtaining a future position, or advancing toward a
degree.
Before proceeding with a proposal or a study, one can weigh these factors and ask others for reactions
to a topic. Seek reactions from colleagues, noted authorities in the field, academic advisers, and faculty
committee members. We find it helpful to ask students to bring to us a one-page sketch of their proposed
project. This sketch includes information about the problem or issue, the central research question, the
types of data collected, and the overall significance of the study.
THE PURPOSE AND ORGANIZATION OF A LITERATURE
REVIEW
Before searching the literature for a study, consider the intent or purpose of a literature review and plan
for its organization. Literature reviews differ for qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods projects.
Purpose of a Literature Review
The literature review accomplishes several purposes. It shares with the reader the results of other
studies that are closely related to the one being undertaken. It relates a study to the larger, ongoing
dialogue in the literature, filling in gaps and extending prior studies (Cooper, 2010; Marshall & Rossman,
2022). It provides a framework for establishing the importance of the study and a benchmark for
comparing the results with other findings. All or some of these reasons may be the foundation for writing
the scholarly literature into a study (see Boote & Beile, 2005, for a more extensive discussion of
purposes for compiling a literature review in research). Studies need to add to the body of literature on a
topic. Researchers shape literature sections in proposals from the larger problem to the narrower issue.
This narrow issue, in turn, leads directly into the methods for studying the issue.
The Organization of the Literature Review
General Forms
In addition to the purpose of a literature review, consider how to organize it. In graduate proposals, it can
assume various forms. In one model, the literature becomes additional information in an introduction to a
study. In another model, the literature forms a separate chapter in the project. Researchers can name
this chapter a “Literature Review” and write the chapter in 20 to 60 pages.
Regardless of the model, our best advice is to seek the opinion of an adviser or faculty mentors as to
how they would like to see the literature addressed. We generally recommend to our advisees that the
literature review in a proposal or project be brief and provide a summary of the major studies addressing
the research problem. It does not need to be fully developed and comprehensive at this point because
faculty may ask for major changes in the study at the proposal meeting.
The literature review in a journal article is an abbreviated form found in a dissertation or master’s thesis.
It is typically contained in a section called “Related Literature” and follows the introduction to a study. This
is the pattern for quantitative research articles in journals. For qualitative research articles the literature
review may be found in a separate section, included in the introduction, or threaded throughout the study.
In general, the literature review can take several forms. Cooper (2010) discussed four types: literature
reviews that (a) integrate what others have done and said, (b) criticize previous scholarly works, (c) build
bridges between related topics, and (d) identify the central issues in a field. Most dissertation and thesis
literature reviews integrate what others have done and said, organize it into a series of related topics
(often from general topics to narrower ones), and summarize the literature by pointing out the central
issues. Regardless of the form, another consideration is how the literature might be presented depending
on a qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods project.

--- Page 59 ---
A Qualitative Structure
In qualitative research, inquirers use the literature consistent with the assumptions of learning from the
participant and not prescribe questions needing answers from the researcher’s standpoint. One of the
chief reasons for conducting a qualitative study is that the study is exploratory. This usually means that
not much has been written about the topic or the population studied, and the researcher seeks to listen to
participants and build an understanding based on what they hear.
However, the use of the literature in qualitative research varies considerably. In theoretically oriented
studies, such as ethnographies or critical ethnographies, the literature on a cultural concept or a critical
theory is introduced early in the report or proposal as an orienting framework. In grounded theory, case
studies, and phenomenological studies, literature is less often used to set the stage for the study.
With an approach grounded in learning from participants and variation by type, there are several models
for incorporating the literature review into a qualitative study. We offer three placement locations for the
literature review, and it can be used in any or all locations. As shown in Table 2.1, the researcher might
include the literature review in the introduction. In this placement, the literature provides a useful rationale
for the problem or issue. This rationale may present a need for the study based on advancing the
importance of studying the issue. This framing of the problem is, of course, contingent on available
studies. One can find illustrations of this model in many qualitative studies employing different types of
inquiry strategy. For a qualitative study the literature review might explore aspects of the central
phenomenon being addressed and divide it into topical areas.
Table 2.1 Using Literature in a Qualitative Study
Examples of
Use of the Literature Criteria Suitable
Strategy Types
The literature frames the There must be some literature available. Typically,
problem in the introduction researchers use
to the study. this way in all
types of
qualitative
studies.
The literature appears in a This approach is often acceptable to an audience Researchers
separate section most familiar with the traditional postpositivist with a strong
approach to literature reviews. quantitative
orientation like
this approach.

--- Page 60 ---
Examples of
Use of the Literature Criteria Suitable
Strategy Types
The literature ends the This approach is most suitable for the inductive Researchers
study; it becomes a basis process of qualitative research; the literature does with a strong
for comparing and not guide and direct the study but becomes an aid qualitative
contrasting findings of the once patterns or categories have been identified. orientation like
qualitative study. this approach.
In a qualitative study, use the literature sparingly in the beginning to convey an inductive design unless the
design type requires a substantial literature orientation at the outset. Consider the most appropriate place
for the literature in a qualitative study, and base the decision on the audience for the project. Keep in
mind the options: placing it at the beginning to frame the problem, placing it in a separate section, and
using it at the end to compare with the findings.
A Quantitative Structure
A second form is to review the literature in a separate section, a model typically used in quantitative
research, and often found in journals with a quantitative orientation. Quantitative research includes
substantial literature at the beginning of a study to provide direction for the research questions or
hypotheses. It is also used to introduce a problem or detail the existing literature in a section titled
“Related Literature” or “Review of Literature” or some other similar phrase. Also, the literature review can
introduce a theory—an explanation for expected relationships (see Chapter 3)—describe the theory that
will be used, and suggest why it is a useful theory to examine. At the end of a study, the researcher then
revisits the literature and compares the results with the existing findings in the literature. In this model, the
quantitative researcher uses the literature deductively as a framework for the research questions or
hypotheses.
A model for the quantitative structure relates to the variables studied (more will be developed on
variables in Chapter 3). A model is to write a quantitative literature review of the literature that contains
sections about the literature related to major independent variables, major dependent variables, and
studies that relate the independent and dependent variables. This approach seems appropriate for
dissertations and conceptualizing the literature to be introduced in a journal article. Consider this model
literature review to comprise five components: (a) an introduction, (b) Topic 1 (about the independent
variable), (c) Topic 2 (about the dependent variable), (d) Topic 3, (studies that address both the
independent and dependent variables), and (e) a summary. Here is more detail about each section:
Introduce the review by telling the reader about the sections included in it. This passage provides a
statement about the organization of the section.
Review Topic 1, addressing the scholarly literature about the independent variable or variables. With
several independent variables, consider subsections or focus on the single most important variable
for the literature review. Remember to address only the literature about the independent variable;
keep the literature about the independent and dependent variables separate in this model.
Review Topic 2, incorporating the scholarly literature about the dependent variable or variables. With
multiple dependent variables, write subsections about each variable or focus on a single important
one.
Review Topic 3, including the scholarly literature that relates the independent variable(s) to the
dependent variable(s). Here we are at the crux of the proposed quantitative study. Thus, this section
should be relatively short and contain studies that are extremely close in topic to the proposed study.
Perhaps nothing has been written on the topic. Construct a section as close as possible to the topic
or review studies that address the topic at a more general level.

--- Page 61 ---
Provide a summary that highlights the most important studies, captures major themes, suggests why
more research is needed on the topic, and advances how the proposed study will fill this need.
This model focuses the literature review, relates it closely to the variables in the research questions and
hypotheses, and sufficiently narrows the study. It becomes a logical point of departure for the research
questions and the method section.
Overall, in a quantitative project, use the literature in a quantitative study deductively—as a basis for
advancing research questions or hypotheses. In a quantitative study plan, use the literature to introduce
the study, advance a theory, describe related literature in a separate section, and compare findings.
A Mixed Methods Structure
In a mixed methods study, the researcher uses either a qualitative or a quantitative approach to the
literature, depending on the type of strategy used. In a sequential approach, the literature is presented in
each phase consistent with the method being used. For example, suppose the study begins with a
quantitative phase. In that case the investigator is likely to include a substantial literature review that
helps establish a rationale for the research questions or hypotheses. If the study begins with a qualitative
phase, then the literature is substantially less, and the researcher may incorporate it more into the end of
the study—an inductive approach. If the research advances a mixed methods study with an equal weight
and emphasis on qualitative and quantitative data, then the literature may take either qualitative or
quantitative forms. The decision as to which form to use is based on the audience for the study and what
would be most receptive to the students’ graduate committees and their orientation.
To recap, the literature used in a mixed methods project will depend on the strategy and the relative
weight given to the qualitative or quantitative research in the study. In a mixed methods study, use the
literature that is consistent with the major type of design and the qualitative or quantitative approach most
prevalent in the design (see Chapter 10 for more about designs).
STEPS IN CONDUCTING A LITERATURE REVIEW
A literature review means locating and summarizing the studies about a topic. Often these are research
studies, but they may also include conceptual articles or opinion pieces that provide frameworks for
thinking about topics. There is no single way to conduct a literature review, but many scholars proceed
systematically to capture, evaluate, and summarize the literature. The steps mentioned next provide an
overview of the process of searching for the literature. Researchers may not follow the steps precisely
as presented here. Often the process of research requires an iterative process of searching and then re-
searching the literature until finding appropriate material. Here is the way we recommend:
1. Begin by identifying key words, which are useful in locating materials in an academic library at a
college or university. These key words may emerge in identifying a topic or result from preliminary
readings. For example, a researcher may start with the broad term, “mental health” and, after
searching the literature, narrow the term to “autism spectrum disorder,” and then further specify
multiple terms, such as “family factors, support, autism spectrum disorder” that serve to narrow the
focus of the search.
2. With the key words in mind, use your home computer to search the databases for holdings (i.e.,
journals and books). Most major libraries have computerized databases. Search general databases,
including ERIC, Google Scholar, Web of Science, EBSCO, ProQuest, and JSTOR. These cover a
broad range of disciplines.
3. Initially, try to locate about 50 reports of research in articles or books related to your topic. Set a
priority on the search for journal articles and books because they are easy to locate and obtain.
Determine whether these articles and books exist in an academic library or whether they need to be
obtained from an interlibrary loan or purchased through a bookstore.
4. Skim this initial group of articles or chapters, and collect those central to your topic. Throughout this
process, simply try to obtain a sense about whether the article or chapter will make a useful
contribution to your understanding of the literature (see the evaluation criteria to follow).
5. As you identify useful literature, begin designing a literature map (to be discussed more fully later).
This is a visual picture (or figure) of groupings of the literature on the topic that illustrates how your
particular study will add to the existing literature and position your study within the larger body of
research.

--- Page 62 ---
6. As you put together the literature map, also begin to draft summaries of the most relevant articles.
Combine these summaries into the final literature review that you write for your proposal or research
study. Include precise references to the literature using an appropriate style guide, such as the
Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020) for complete references to use at
the end of the proposal or study.
7. After summarizing the literature, assemble the literature review, structuring it thematically or
organizing it by important concepts. End the literature review with a summary of the major themes,
and suggest how the study further adds to the literature and addresses a gap in the themes. This
summary should also point toward the methods (i.e., data collection and data analysis) to be written
after the literature review. In this summary, a researcher could also advance a critique of the past
literature and point out deficiencies in it and issues in its methods (see Boote & Beile, 2005).
SEARCHING THE LITERATURE
The literature search requires knowing databases to search, prioritizing the types of literature available,
assessing the quality of the literature before including it in a review, developing written notes or abstracts
for each source, and organizing the literature through a visual map.
Computer Databases
To facilitate collecting relevant material, use computerized databases for accessing the literature.
Computer databases of the literature are available through the internet, and they provide easy access
to thousands of journals, conference papers, and materials on many different topics. Academic libraries
at major universities house commercial and public domain databases. We will review only a few of the
major databases available, but they represent major sources of information for literature reviews.
ERIC is a free online digital library of education research and information sponsored by the Institute
of Education Sciences (IES) of the U.S. Department of Education. ERIC provides a search of 1.4
million items indexed since 1966. It is found on the internet at http://eric.ed.gov. The collection
includes journal articles, books, research syntheses, conference papers, technical reports, policy
papers, and other education-related materials. To best use ERIC, identify appropriate descriptors for
your topic, as in the terms used by indexers to categorize articles or documents. Researchers can
search through the Thesaurus of ERIC Descriptors (Educational Resources Information Center,
1975) or browse the online thesaurus.
Another free database to search is Google Scholar. It is located on the internet at
scholar.google.com. It provides a way to broadly search for literature across many disciplines and
sources, such as peer-reviewed papers, theses, books, abstracts, and articles from academic
publishers, professional societies, universities, and other scholarly organizations. The articles
identified in a Google Scholar search provide links to abstracts, related articles, electronic versions
of articles affiliated with a library specified, web searches for information about this work, and
opportunities to purchase the full text of the article.
Researchers can obtain abstracts to publications in the health sciences through the free-access
PubMed (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). It is available at pubmed.gov on the internet. This database is a
service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine, and it includes over 17 million citations from
MEDLINE and life science journals for biomedical articles going back to the 1950s. PubMed includes
links to full-text articles (located in academic libraries) and other related resources. A PubMed User
Guide is available at pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. This guide provides useful information about steps in
searching by citation, author, journal, and date of publication.
Also available is ProQuest (proquest.com), which enables a researcher to search many different
databases, and it is one of the largest online content repositories in the world. It advertises that it
holds the world’s largest collection of dissertations and theses.
Another database is EBSCO (ebsco.com). It is a mega-database featuring many specialized
databases. Because EBSCO taps into many different databases, it can be one search tool to use
before using more specialized databases. It is also an online research service, including full-text
databases, subject indexes, point-of-care medical references, historical digital archives, and e-
books. The company provides access to more than 350 databases and nearly 300,000 e-books.

--- Page 63 ---
Scopus is an institutional-subscription database for literature. It advertises as the largest abstract
and citation database of peer-reviewed literature, scientific journals, books and conference
proceedings. It is available from Elsevier Publications.
Consider the Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ). This database is a specialized academic
database in that all the articles indexed are open access and can be accessed free of charge. Open
access means that the copyright holder of a scholarly work grants usage rights to others using an
open license. This database contains more than 7 million articles and 17,500 journals. It was a
service launched in 2003, and it covers all areas of science, technology, medicine, social sciences,
arts and humanities.
Other more specialized commercially licensed databases found in many academic libraries include
Sociological Abstracts (Cambridge Scientific Abstracts), available under ProQuest in academic
libraries, and PsycINFO (www.apa.org).
In summary, our research tips for searching computer databases are to do the following:
Use both the free, online literature databases and those available through your institutional academic
library.
Search several databases, even if you feel that your topic is not strictly education, as found in ERIC,
or psychology, as found in PsycINFO. Both ERIC and PsycINFO view education and psychology as
broad terms for many topics.
Use guides to terms to locate your articles, such as a thesaurus, when available.
A process for conducting a search is to locate recent journal articles and documents on a topic.
Conduct a preliminary search using descriptors from the online thesaurus and locating a journal
article or document on a topic. Then look closely at the descriptors used in this article and document,
and run another search using these terms. This procedure will maximize the possibility of obtaining a
good list of articles for your literature review.
Use databases that provide access to full-text copies of your articles (through academic libraries, the
internet connection to a library, or for a fee) as much as possible to reduce the amount of time
searching for copies of your articles. Consider searching the free DOAJ.
Types of Literature
With so much literature available, we recommend a priority for reviewing the different types of literature
to maximize the time spent in search. Also, there is a need to evaluate the quality of the information
gathered and to apply a set of criteria for assessing whether the information should be included in the
review.
Priority of the Literature
We use a priority for a search of the literature to save time. What types of literature might be reviewed,
and in what priority? If you are examining a topic for the first time and unaware of the research, start with
broad syntheses of the literature, such as overviews found in encyclopedias (e.g., Aikin, 1992; Keeves,
1988). You might also look for summaries of the literature on your topic presented in journal articles or
abstract series (e.g., Annual Review of Psychology, 1950–).
Next, turn to journal articles in respected scientific journals—especially those that report research
studies. By research, we mean that the author or authors pose a question or hypothesis, collect data,
and answer the question or hypothesis with the data. There are journals widely read in your field, and
typically they are publications with a high-quality editorial board comprising leading scientists. Start with
the most recent issues of the journals, look for studies about a topic, and then work backward in time.
Follow up on references at the end of the articles for more sources to examine.

--- Page 64 ---
Turn to books related to the topic. Begin with research monographs that summarize the scholarly
literature. Then consider entire books on a single topic by an author or group of authors or books that
contain chapters written by different authors. Follow this search by looking for recent conference papers.
Look for major national conferences and the papers delivered at them. Often conference papers report
the latest research developments. Most major conferences either require or request that authors submit
their papers for inclusion in computerized indices. Contact authors of pertinent studies. Seek them out at
conferences. Write or phone them, asking if they know studies related to an area of interest, and inquire
if they have an instrument that might be used or modified for use in a study.
The web also provides helpful materials for a literature review. The easy access and ability to capture
entire articles enhances the attractiveness of the material. However, evaluate these articles carefully for
quality, and be cautious about whether they represent rigorous, thoughtful, and systematic research
suitable for use in a literature review.
Overall Evaluation Quality
Before including the literature in a research proposal or study, evaluate the quality of the material. Only
high-quality literature should be included. How would a researcher judge the quality? For journals, find
articles from nationally refereed publications. These are journals with an editorial review board. Journal
issues list editorial board members typically in the first few pages of an issue. Online journals, in addition,
often include articles that have undergone rigorous reviews by editorial boards. Check whether the journal
has a refereed editorial board that reviews manuscripts and has published standards for accepting
manuscripts in an editorial statement.
For books, look at publishers with name recognition and length of service over many years. An online
search can provide information about the publishing house. We generally recommend books (and journal
articles) published in the last 10 years. Conference papers can provide useful, high-quality information if
the paper is included as a paper in a recent conference. If reporting in literature review web studies, look
for literature that has been reviewed for quality. Contacting the web source can provide this useful
information. Further, advisers or mentors can recommend high-quality literature to include in a proposal or
study.
Abstracting the Literature
When reviewing the literature, it is helpful to develop abstracts of the studies to later include in the review.
An abstract is a brief review of the literature (typically a short paragraph) that summarizes major
elements to enable a reader to understand the basic features of the article or book. Researchers need to
consider what material to extract and summarize when developing an abstract. This is important
information when reviewing perhaps dozens, if not hundreds, of studies.
Components of an Abstract
A model for developing an abstract exists in the abstracts for journal articles. A good summary of a
research study reported in a journal for a data-based article might include the following points in an
abstract:
Mention the problem being addressed.
State the central purpose or focus of the study.
Briefly state information about the sample, population, or subjects.
Review key results that relate to the proposed study.
If it is a critique or methods review (Cooper, 2010), point out technical and methodological flaws in
the study.

--- Page 65 ---
In addition to examining abstracts, there are other places in a study to look for these parts. In well-
crafted journal articles, the problem and purpose statements are clearly stated in the introduction.
Information about the sample, population, or subjects is found midway through in a method (or
procedure) section. In the results sections, look for passages in which the researchers report information
to answer or address each research question or hypothesis. For book-length research studies, look for
the same points.
Theoretical, Conceptual, and Methodological Abstracts
How are studies advancing the methods of research, theories, typologies, or syntheses of past research
abstracted because these are not research studies? The material to be extracted from these non-
empirical studies would be as follows (see Example 2.1):
Mention the problem addressed by the article or book.
Identify the central theme of the study.
State the major conclusions related to this theme.
If the review type is methodological, mention flaws in reasoning, logic, force of argument, and so
forth.
Example 2.1 Components of a Methodological Journal Article Abstract
The following abstract for an article advancing quality criteria for mixed methods research (Hirose
& Creswell, 2022) illustrates the major components of a methodological article:
Recent published articles and comments by researchers, federal recommendations, and
professional association standards have recommended core quality criteria for designing
and writing mixed methods research. Unfortunately, a synthesis of recent timely
recommendations has not been made, and we can draw guidance from them for detailed
guidance for beginning researchers (the research problem). This article presents six
best practices in mixed methods culled from recent sources, discusses the need for each
practice, and then illustrates its use in a recent empirical study from Japan (the purpose
of the study and the topics addressed). This article contributes to the field of mixed
methods methodology by providing a parsimonious list of core criteria based on
synthesizing three recent influential recommendations to illustrate a state-of-the-art set of
core quality criteria.
This abstract is short because it was limited to only 120 words as stated in the author’s guidelines for the
journal. Still, it represents a concise abstract for a methodological article that conveys the purpose, and
the major topics in the study. Also, the final sentence mentions the contribution of the article to the field of
mixed methods. Stating the contribution reflects the criteria required by the journal.
A Literature Map
One of the first tasks for a researcher working with a new topic is to organize the literature. As
mentioned earlier, this organization enables a person to understand how the proposed study adds to,
extends, or replicates research completed.
A useful approach for this step is to design a literature map (see Figure 2.1). This is an idea that we
developed several years ago, and it has been a useful tool for students to use when organizing their
review of the literature for making presentations to graduate committees, summarizing the literature for a
scholarly presentation, or composing an article for journal publication.

--- Page 66 ---
Description
Figure 2.1 An Example of a Literature Map
*Employees’ concerns about the fairness of and the making of managerial decisions
Source: Janovec (2001).
The literature map presents a visual summary of the literature, positions the current researcher’s study
within this existing literature, and represents this alignment in a figure. Maps are organized in different
ways. One could be a hierarchical structure with a top-down presentation of the literature, ending at the
bottom with the proposed study. Another might be like a flowchart in which the reader understands the
literature as unfolding from left to right, with the farthest right-hand section advancing a proposed study.
A third model might be a series of circles; each circle represents a body of literature and the intersection
of the circles as the place indicating the need for future research. We have seen examples of these
possibilities and found them all effective.
The central idea is that the researcher begins to build a visual picture of existing research about a topic.
This literature map presents an overview of existing literature. Figure 2.1 is an illustration of a map that
shows the literature found on procedural justice in organizational studies (Janovec, 2001). Janovec’s map
illustrates a hierarchical design, and she used several principles of good map design:
She placed her topic in the box at the top of the hierarchy.
Next, she took the studies that she found in computer searches, located copies of these studies, and
organized them into three broad subtopics (i.e., Justice Perceptions Formation, Justice Effects, and
Justice in Organizational Change). For another map, the researcher may have more or fewer than
three major categories, depending on the extent and publications on the topic.
Within each box are labels that describe the nature of the studies in the box (i.e., outcomes).
Also within each box are references to major citations illustrating its content. It is useful to use
current and illustrative references of the topic of the box and to briefly state the references in an
appropriate style, such as APA (American Psychological Association, 2020).
She included several levels for her literature map. In other words, major topics lead to subtopics and
then to sub-subtopics.
Some branches of the chart are more developed than others. The extent of development depends on
the amount of literature available and the depth of the exploration of the literature by the researcher.

--- Page 67 ---
After organizing the literature into a diagram, Janovec (2001) next considered the branches of the
figure that provided a springboard for her proposed study. She placed a “Need to Study” (or
proposed study) box at the bottom of the map, she briefly identified the nature of this proposed
study (Procedural Justice and Culture), and she then drew lines to past literature that her project
would extend. She proposed this study based on ideas written by other authors in the future
research sections of their studies.
In this way, a reader could see how her study added to the existing literature by building on the three
broad categories of literature.
Although not evident in her map, she included quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods studies in
her literature map.
Finally, she could have written a narrative description of the literature map for her committee or
presentation. In it, she could discuss the heading box at the top of the map and the databases
reviewed. She could have specified the divisions of the literature into broad topics and indicated the
specific topic that she planned to study (at the bottom box of the map). Finally she could discuss
how her topic expanded branches in the literature (the connecting lines).
Composing a literature map is challenging. You need to do the following:
Educate readers. Individuals seeing this map for the first time may not be familiar with this approach
to organizing the literature. Carefully explain the intent of the map and the position of your study
within it.
Take the time necessary. It takes time to develop such a map and locate literature to put into the
map. For a preliminary map, we consider collecting maybe 25 studies. For a full literature map for a
dissertation or thesis, this number may expand to 100 studies or more.
Limit the branches leading to your study. Figuring out how your study adds to the literature takes
some time. Select one or two subdivisions that your study will extend, and then draw the lines from
your proposed topic to the subdivisions.
Consider the broad topic. Consider carefully the broad topic at the top of the map. This is the topic
to which your literature map adds. Ask others who know the literature to see how they would group
the studies stemming from the broad topic.
Revise the map. Go through several versions of the map. Develop a preliminary map, write the
discussion, and solicit feedback from others.
Draw with a software program. Use a software program to draw the figure, such as a Word
document or a PowerPoint slide.
STYLE MANUAL USE
Style manuals provide guidelines for creating a scholarly form of uniform and consistent communication
so that readers focus on ideas rather than formatting and can scan articles. A consistent style exists for
citing references, creating headings, presenting tables and figures, and using bias-free language.
Researchers need to select one style manual to use following the type of style recommended by their
discipline, field, and institution.
Several style manuals exist. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association
(American Psychological Association, 2020) is the most popular style manual in the social sciences. This
manual should be purchased early in the training of students and researchers. The Chicago Manual of
Style, 17th Edition (University of Chicago Press, 2017) is also used in many disciplines in the social
sciences. Some journals have developed their variations of the popular styles.
We will focus on using the Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020). Our first
recommendation is to examine all the chapters of this new edition style manual. It provides a useful guide
for writing and publishing papers, ethics (and plagiarism and unethical writing), formatting a paper, and

--- Page 68 ---
standards of quality for quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods research. It also covers mechanics of
style, such as punctuation, capitalization, abbreviations, numbers, and statistics. It includes helpful
information about the publication process.
Our focus will be on specific elements that researchers will need to understand to complete a graduate
proposal or a research project. We provide guidance about several new features available in the latest
seventh edition of the Publication Manual:
When writing in-text citations, keep in mind the appropriate form for types of references, and pay
close attention to the format for multiple citations. In citing works with three or more authors, state
only the first author name, and “et al.” is needed rather than multiple authors.
When writing the end-of-text references, note the appropriate way to cite journal articles, books,
conferences papers, and internet and social media documents. In the new Publication Manual
readers can view more than 100 examples of the correct reference for documents. One major
change in the new APA Publication Manual is that the location of publishers is no longer needed.
Instead of citing, “Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE,” authors can abbreviate this to be “SAGE.”
The headings are ordered in a scholarly paper in terms of five levels. Typically, authors use three or
four levels of headings in proposals and projects, A level 1 heading would be the title of the proposal
or project. Level 2 establishes the major content sections of the work, and levels 3–5 subdivide the
major content into sections. The new edition of the Publication Manual has changed the format for
levels 3 through 5 to provide greater clarity through bold letters and indentations. A useful table
presenting the heading levels is available in the Publication Manual.
The new edition of the Publication Manual emphasizes the importance of inclusive and bias-free
language. Also see their guidelines as found in https://www.apa.org/about/apa/equity-diversity-
inclusive/language-guidelines.pdf. Researchers should use singular “they” instead of “him” or “her.”
Bias-free language applies to statements about age, disability, gender, racial and ethnic identity, and
sexual orientation. We will say more about this guidance in Chapter 4 and ethical issues in reporting
studies.
Footnotes provide additional content or attribution to copyright holders. They may provide
supplemental information to the text and should be included only if they strengthen the text. They are
not frequently used in proposal or academic reports. See the Publication Manual for appropriate
formatting for footnotes.
The Publication Manual provides examples for formatting tables and figures. Careful attention needs
to be given to the headings because the recent APA edition recommends italicizing the title of tables
and figures.
In summary, the most important aspect of using a style manual is to provide a consistent reporting style
for readers.
THE DEFINITION OF TERMS
Another topic related to reviewing the literature is the identification and definition of terms that readers
will need to understand a proposed research project. A definition of terms section may be found separate
from the literature review, included as part of the literature review, or placed in different sections of a
proposal.
Define terms individuals outside the field of study may not understand and that go beyond common
language (Locke et al., 2014). Whether a term should be defined is a matter of judgment, but define a
term if there is any likelihood that readers will not know its meaning. Also, define terms when they first
appear so that a reader does not read ahead in the proposal operating with one set of definitions only to
find out later that the author uses a different set. As Wilkinson (1991) commented, “Scientists have
sharply defined terms with which to think clearly about their research and to communicate their findings
and ideas accurately” (p. 22). Defining terms also adds precision to a scientific study, as Firestone
(1987) stated:

--- Page 69 ---
The words of an everyday language are rich in multiple meanings. Like other symbols, their
power comes from the combination of meaning in a specific setting. . . . Scientific language
ostensibly strips this multiplicity of meaning from words in the interest of precision. This is the
reason common terms are given “technical meanings” for scientific purposes. (p. 17)
With this need for precision, one finds terms stated early in the introduction to articles. In dissertations
and thesis proposals, researchers define terms typically in a special section of the study. The rationale is
that in formal research, students must be precise in how they use language and terms. The need to
ground thoughts in authoritative definitions constitutes good scientific practice.
General Guidelines
No one approach governs how one defines the terms in a study, but several suggestions follow (see also
Locke et al., 2014):
Define a term when it first appears in the proposal. For example, in the introduction, a term may
require a definition to help the reader understand the research problem and questions or hypotheses
in the study.
Write definitions at a specific operational or applied level. Operational definitions are written in
specific language rather than abstract, conceptual language. We prefer operational definitions
because the definition section in a dissertation provides an opportunity for the author to be specific
about terms.
Do not define the terms in everyday language; instead, use accepted language available in the
research literature. In this way, the terms are grounded in the literature and not invented (Locke et
al., 2014). It is possible that the precise definition of a term is not available in the literature and
everyday language will need to be used. In this case, provide a definition and use the term
consistently throughout the plan and the study (Wilkinson, 1991).
Researchers might define terms so that they accomplish different goals. A definition may describe a
common language word (e.g., organization). It may also be paired with a limitation (e.g., the
curriculum may be limited). It may establish a criterion (e.g., high grade point average), and it could
also define a term operationally (e.g., reinforcement will be referred to as giving rewards).
Although no one format exists for defining terms, one approach is to develop a separate section,
called the “Definition of Terms,” and clearly set off the terms and their definitions by highlighting the
terms. In this way, the word is assigned an invariant meaning (Locke et al., 2014). Typically, this
separate section is not more than two to three pages.
Special Terms
Special terms that need to be defined appear in all three types of studies: (a) qualitative, (b) quantitative,
and (c) mixed methods. In qualitative studies, because of the inductive, evolving methodological design,
inquirers may define few terms at the beginning; although they may advance tentative definitions. Instead,
themes (or perspectives or dimensions) may emerge through the data analysis. In the procedure section,
authors define these terms as they surface during the process of research. This approach delays the
definition of terms until they appear in the study, and it makes such definitions difficult to specify in
advance in research proposals. For this reason, qualitative proposals often do not include separate
sections for a definition of terms. Instead, writers pose tentative, qualitative definitions threaded
throughout the study.
In quantitative studies operating more within the deductive model of fixed and set research objectives,
include extensive definitions early in the research proposal. Investigators may place them in separate
sections and precisely define them. The researchers try to comprehensively define all relevant terms at
the beginning of studies and to use accepted definitions found in the literature.
In mixed methods studies, it is helpful to readers to define key terms used in this approach to research,
such as “mixed methods,” “convergent design,” “integration,” and “metainferences” (see Chapter 10). The

--- Page 70 ---
approach to definitions might include a separate section if the study begins with a first phase of
quantitative data collection. If it begins with qualitative data collection, then the terms may emerge during
the research, and they are defined in the findings or results section of the final report. However, in all
mixed methods studies, there are terms that may be unfamiliar to readers—for example, the definition of
a mixed methods study in a procedural discussion (see Chapter 10). Also, clarify terms related to the
strategy of inquiry used, such as concurrent or sequential, and the specific name for a strategy (e.g.,
convergent design, as discussed in Chapter 10).
Example 2.2 Defining Terms in a Dissertation
This example illustrates a definition of terms presented in a mixed methods study in a separate
section of the first chapter that introduces the study. VanHorn-Grassmeyer (1998) studied how
119 new professionals in student affairs in colleges and universities engage in reflection—either
individually or collaboratively. She both surveyed the new professionals and conducted in-depth
interviews with them. Because she studied individual and collaborative reflection among student
affairs professionals, she provided detailed definitions of these terms in the beginning of the study.
We illustrate two of her terms next. Notice how she referenced her definitions in meanings formed
by other authors in the literature:
Individual Reflection. Schon (1983) devoted an entire book to concepts he named
reflective thinking, reflection-in-action, and reflective practice; this after an entire book
was written a decade earlier with Argyris (Argyris & Schon, 1978) to introduce the
concepts. Therefore, a concise definition of this researcher’s understanding of individual
reflection that did justice to something that most aptly had been identified as an intuitive
act was difficult to reach. However, the most salient characteristics of individual reflection
for the purposes of this study were these three: (a) an “artistry of practice” (Schon,
1983), (b) how one practices overtly what one knows intuitively, and (c) how a
professional enhances practice through thoughtful discourse within the mind.
Student Affairs Professional. A professional has been described in many ways. One
description identified an individual who exhibited “a high degree of independent judgment,
based on a collective, learned body of ideas, perspectives, information, norms, and
habits [and who engage(d) in professional knowing]” (Baskett & Marsick, 1992, p. 3). A
student affairs professional has exhibited such traits in service to students in a higher
education environment, in any one of a number of functions which support academic and
co-curricular success (pp. 11–12).
Summary
Before searching the literature, identify your topic, using strategies such as drafting a brief title or
stating a central research question. Also consider whether this topic can and should be
researched by reviewing access to participants and resources. Also, assess the topic for its
contribution to the literature, interest to others, and consistency with personal goals.
Researchers conduct a scholarly literature review to present results of similar studies, to relate
the present study to an ongoing dialogue in the literature, and to provide a framework for
comparing results of a study with other studies. For qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
designs, the literature serves different purposes. In qualitative research, the literature helps
substantiate the research problem, but it does not constrain participants’ views. A popular
approach is to include more literature at the end of a qualitative study than at the beginning. In
quantitative research, the literature not only helps substantiate the problem but also suggests
possible questions or hypotheses to be addressed. A separate literature review section is
typically found in quantitative studies. In mixed methods research, the use of literature will depend
on the type of design and the intent of the qualitative and quantitative aspects. Regardless of the
type of study, consider the type of literature review to conduct, such as an integrative, critical,
bridging topics, and the identification of central issues.

--- Page 71 ---
When conducting a literature review, identify key words for searching the literature. Then search
the online databases, such as ERIC, EBSCO, ProQuest, Google Scholar, PubMed, and more
specialized databases. Locate articles or books based on a priority of searching first for journal
articles and then books. Identify references that will contribute to your literature review. Evaluate
the quality of each source. Develop abstracts of key ideas for each source of literature. Group
these studies into a literature map that shows the major categories of studies and positions of
your proposed study within those categories. Begin writing summaries of the studies, noting
complete references according to a style manual (e.g., American Psychological Association,
2020). Define key terms, and possibly develop a definition of terms section for your proposal or
include them within your literature review.
KEY TERMS
Abstract 37
Computer databases of the literature 34
Definition of terms 44
Literature map 41
Style manuals 43
Topic 26
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Develop a literature map of the studies on your topic. Include in the map the proposed study,
and draw lines from the proposed study to branches of studies in the map so that a reader
can easily see how yours will extend existing literature.
2. Comment on the steps in a literature search that present the greatest challenge.
3. Search the computer databases for relevant literature on your topic, and find one article close
to your study topic.
4. Find a journal article on your topic. Write your own abstract of the article and evaluate the
study quality.
Additional Readings
American Psychological Association. (2020). Publication manual of the American Psychological
Association (7th ed.). Author.
The latest APA style manual is a must for every researcher’s shelf. It provides an entire chapter
offering examples of how to cite works in a reference list. The examples are extensive—from
journals (or periodicals) to patents. Further guidelines for presenting tables and figures are
available with good examples that you can use. This manual also has chapters on scholarly
writing, the mechanics of style, and standards for writing quantitative, qualitative, and mixed
methods research. For those planning on publishing, it provides useful information about the
standard elements of a manuscript and ethical issues to consider.
Boote, D. N., & Beile, P. (2005). Scholars before researchers: On the centrality of the dissertation
literature review in research preparation. Educational Researcher, 34(6), 3–15.

--- Page 72 ---
Understanding the importance of a literature review and conveying it helps provide for a high-
quality proposal or project. David Boote and Penny Beile discuss the importance for dissertation
students of compiling sophisticated literature reviews. To this end, they advance five criteria that
should be in a rigorous literature review. The author should justify the inclusion and exclusion of
literature (coverage), critically examine the state of the field, situate the topic in the broader
literature, examine the history of the topic, note ambiguities in definitions and the literature, and
offer new perspectives (synthesis). It should also critique the research methods (methodology),
the practical and scholarly significance of the research (significance), and be written well in a
coherent fashion (rhetoric).
Locke, L. F., Spirduso, W. W., & Silverman, S. J. (2014). Proposals that work: A guide for
planning dissertations and grant proposals (6th ed.). SAGE.
Defining terms in a proposal or study helps the reader understand the project. Lawrence Locke,
Waneen Spirduso, and Stephen Silverman describe several stages for reviewing the literature.
These include developing the concepts that provide a rationale for the study, identifying subtopics
for each major concept, and adding the most important references that support each concept.
They also provide five rules for defining terms in a scholarly study: (a) never invent words, (b)
provide definitions early in a proposal, (c) do not use common language forms of words, (d)
define words when they are first introduced, and (e) use specific definitions for words.
Punch, K. F. (2014). Introduction to social research: Quantitative and qualitative approaches (3rd
ed.). SAGE.
Literature reviews differ depending on whether the study is qualitative, quantitative, or mixed
methods. Keith Punch provides a guide to social research that addresses quantitative and
qualitative approaches. His conceptualizations of central issues that divide the two approaches
address key differences. Punch notes that when writing a proposal or report, the point at which to
concentrate on the literature varies in different forms of research. Factors that affect that decision
include the style of research, the overall research strategy, and how closely the study will follow
the directions of the literature.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The procedural justice in organizations are as follows:
Justice perceptions formation
Motives: Tyler, 1994
Need to Study: Procedural Justice and Culture
Knowledge: Schappe, 1996
Climates: Naumann and Bennett, 2000
Organizational Structures: Schminke, Ambrose, and Cropanzano, 2000
Voice: Bies and Shapiro, 1998; Hunton, Hall, and Price, 1998; Lind, Kanfer, and Earley, 1990
Justice effects
Outcomes: Masterson, Lewis, Goldman, and Taylor, 2000

--- Page 73 ---
Need to Study: Procedural Justice and Culture
Trust: Konovsky and Pugh, 1994
Organizational Citizenship Behaviors: Moorman, 1991
Organizational support: Moorman, Blakely, and Niehoff, 1998
Unjust treatment: Dailey and Kirk, 1992; Kickul, 2001; Tepper, 2000
Justice in organizational change
Explanations
Divestitures: Gopinath and Becker, 2000
Relocations: Daly, 1995
Pay Freeze: Schaubroeck, May, and Brown, 1994
Past history: Lawson and Angle, 1998
Leadership: Wiesenfeld, Brockner, and Thibault, 2000
Strategic Decision Making: Kim and Mauborgne, 1998
Need to Study: Procedural Justice and Culture
Under justice effects, behaviors are interconnected with outcomes, trust, and support, and trust is
interconnected with outcomes and support.

--- Page 74 ---
CHAPTER 3 THE USE OF THEORY
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify the seven steps in locating and using theories for
incorporation into a proposal or a study.
2. Identify the major distinctions between an inductive and
deductive use of theory in a research study.
3. Define variables, their measurement, and a causal model for
inclusion in quantitative research.
4. Distinguish between the deductive approach, a theoretical
standpoint, and an end point as ways to incorporate theories
into qualitative research.
5. Describe the difference between discipline-based theory and
social justice use of theories in mixed methods research.
INTRODUCTION
One component of reviewing the literature is to determine what theories
might be used to explore the questions in a scholarly study. In
quantitative research, researchers often test hypotheses derived from
theories. A quantitative dissertation often includes an entire section of a
research proposal that might present the broader theory guiding the
study. In qualitative research, the use of theory is much more varied.
The inquirer may generate a theory as a study outcome and place it at
the project’s end, such as in grounded theory. In other qualitative
studies, it comes at the beginning and provides a lens that shapes the
focus and questions asked, such as in ethnographies or in social justice
research. In mixed methods research, researchers may both test
theories and generate them. Moreover, in mixed methods research,
theories inform different parts of the design, such as shaping the
quantitative instruments or the qualitative interview questions.
Researchers use theories in quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods
studies. We begin this chapter by focusing on theory use in a quantitative
study. Then the discussion moves to the use of theory in a qualitative

--- Page 75 ---
study. Finally, the chapter turns to the use of discipline-based theories
and social justice theories in mixed methods research.
THE VARIED USE OF THEORY
The nature of a theory varies considerably in research. Its use varies
depending on a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods study. Theory
can be a prediction of what the researcher expects to find or an
inductive or deductive framework for a study. It may be presented as a
model or diagram of the relationship among variables or constructs. It
may exist as generalizations from findings, or a call for action, such as a
change-oriented social agenda for a population or society. In these
studies, theory goes by diverse names, such as theoretical orientation,
theoretical rationale, theoretical model, or simply a theory. It may be
called a “hook” (Sandelowski, 1996) for informing many phases of the
research process.
By searching the literature (see Chapter 2), researchers can find
examples of theories to use. A close inspection of these theories
suggests they often have multiple authors, a date of origin, application in
different types of studies, a visual model, and a distinct name.
The general procedures for locating and including theory are these:
1. Identify the theory (or theories) from the literature search.
2. Place the theory (model or conceptual framework) at the beginning
of the article as an a priori framework to guide the questions or
hypotheses in the study.
3. Write about the theory by first advancing the name of the theory to
be used followed by a description how it informs the quantitative,
qualitative, or mixed methods study.
4. Discuss the studies using the theory, especially studies closely
related to the present study.
5. Include a diagram of the theory indicating the probable links in the
theory and the major concepts or variables in the theory.
6. Have the theory provide a framework for the study.
7. Return to the theory at the end of the study to review its role in
informing findings and results. Compare the theory use with other
studies.
QUANTITATIVE THEORY USE

--- Page 76 ---
Understanding the use of theory in quantitative research requires defining
theory, assessing the types of variables and their measurement,
introducing the concept of causality, viewing forms of stating theories,
placing a theory in a proposal or study, and writing a theory passage.
Definition of a Theory in Quantitative Research
We start with introducing the specific definition of a theory in quantitative
research. Some historical precedent exists for viewing a theory as a
scientific prediction or explanation for what the researcher expects to
find (see Thomas, 1997, for different ways of conceptualizing theories).
For example, Kerlinger’s (1979) definition of a theory seems still valid
today. He said that a theory in quantitative research is “a set of
interrelated constructs (variables), definitions, and propositions that
presents a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations among
variables, with the purpose of explaining natural phenomena” (p. 64).
In this definition, a theory has a purpose (i.e., explains) and a procedure
(i.e., the relationship among interrelated variables). These interrelations
exist in the form of propositions or hypotheses. We would add to this
definition that another purpose of a theory is to predict the expected
relationship among variables. Labovitz and Hagedorn (1971) used the
term theoretical rationale to describe a theory. They defined this
rationale as “specifying how and why the variables and relational
statements are interrelated” (p. 17). Why would an independent variable,
X, influence or affect a dependent variable, Y? The theory provides an
explanation for this expectation or prediction. A discussion about this
theory would appear in a section of a proposal in the literature review or
in a separate section called the theory base, the theoretical rationale,
the theoretical perspective, or the conceptual framework. We prefer the
term theoretical perspective because it has been popularly used as a
required section for proposals for research when one applies to present
a paper at the American Educational Research Association conference.
A theory might appear in a research study as an argument, a discussion,
a figure, a rationale, or a visual model. The metaphor of a rainbow can
help visualize how a theory operates. Assume that the rainbow bridges
the independent and dependent variables (or constructs). This rainbow
ties together the variables and provides an overarching explanation for
how and why one would expect the independent variables to explain or
predict the dependent variables.
Theories develop when researchers test a prediction over and over. For
example, here is how the process of developing a theory works.

--- Page 77 ---
Investigators combine independent, mediating, and dependent variables
into questions based on different forms of measures. These questions
provide information about the type of relationship (positive, negative, or
unknown) and its magnitude (e.g., high or low).
Forming this information into a predictive statement (hypothesis), a
researcher might write, “The greater the centralization of power in
leaders, the greater the disenfranchisement of the followers.” When
researchers test hypotheses such as this over and over in different
settings and with different populations (e.g., the Boy Scouts, a
Presbyterian church, the Rotary Club, and a group of high school
students), a theory emerges, and someone gives it a name (e.g., a
theory of attribution). Thus, theory develops as an explanation to
advance knowledge in fields (Thomas, 1997).
Another aspect of theories is that they vary in their breadth of coverage.
Neuman (2009) reviewed theories at three levels: (a) micro level, (b)
meso level, and (c) macro level. Micro-level theories provide
explanations limited to small slices of time, space, or numbers of people,
such as a theory of face work, which explains how people engage in
rituals during face-to-face interactions. Meso-level theories link the micro
and macro levels. These are theories of organizations, social movement,
or communities, such as a theory of control in organizations. Macro-level
theories explain larger aggregates, such as social institutions, cultural
systems, and whole societies. A macro-level theory of social
stratification, for example, explains how the amount of surplus a society
produces increases with the development of the society.
Variables in Quantitative Research
Theories explain relationships among variables. A variable refers to a
characteristic or attribute of an individual or an organization that
researchers can measure or observe and varies among the individuals or
organizations. Examples of variables are gender; age; socioeconomic
status (SES); and attitudes or behaviors such as racism, social control,
political power, or leadership.
Here are the types of variables in quantitative research:
Independent variables influence, or affect, outcomes in studies.
They are “independent” because researchers manipulate them in
experiments and are thus independent of all other influences. In an

--- Page 78 ---
example, in an 8-week experimental study, the investigator asked
some participants to drink one glass of red wine daily (red wine
group). Other participants in a comparison group were instructed to
maintain their normal consumption patterns (control group). In this
case, the researcher systematically manipulated red wine
consumption. Moderate red wine consumption is an independent
variable in this study. Independent variables are also commonly
referred to as treatment or manipulated variables in experimental
studies.
Dependent variables are variables that depend on the independent
variables. They are the outcomes or results influenced by the
independent variables. We find multiple dependent measures in
experimental studies, such as in the red wine example, measuring
dependent variables, such as heart attack incidence, strokes, or the
amount of plaque formations.
Predictor variables (also called antecedent variables) are variables
that predict an outcome of interest in survey method studies.
Predictor variables are like independent variables in that they are
hypothesized to affect outcomes in a study. However, they are
dissimilar because the researcher cannot systematically manipulate
a predictor variable. It may not be possible or feasible to assign
individuals to a red wine consumption or control group (as an
independent variable), but it may be possible to measure naturally
occurring red wine consumption in a community sample as a
predictor variable.
Outcome variables (also called criterion or response variables)
are considered outcomes or results of predictor variables in survey
method studies. They share the same properties as dependent
variables as described above.
Intervening or mediating variables stand between the
independent and dependent variables, and they transmit the effect
of an independent variable on a dependent variable (for a review,
see MacKinnon et al., 2007). A mediating variable can be tested
using different kinds of statistical mediation analyses (see
MacKinnon et al., 2007, for some examples). It provides a
quantitative assessment of how the independent variable is exerting
its effects on the dependent variable. For example, in our wine
study, polyphenol compounds in red wine influences the health
benefits of moderate red wine consumption (e.g., Szmitko & Verma,
2005). The researcher needs to measure the amount of polyphenols

--- Page 79 ---
occurring in this red wine consumption study as a mediating
variable.
Moderating variables are predictor variables that affect the
direction and/or the strength of the relationship between
independent and dependent variables or between predictor and
outcome variables (Thompson, 2006). These variables act on (or
interact with) the independent variables and, in combination with
them, influence the dependent variables. Moderating variables are
powerful in that they can identify potential boundary conditions.
Often these moderating variables are demographic information,
such as age, education, or SES.
A confounding variable refers to a “third variable” that is both
related to the independent (or predictor) variable and to the
dependent (or outcome) variable. For example, a researcher may
draw the conclusion that moderate red wine consumption reduces
heart attack risk. But it might be possible that regular aerobic
exercise is a confounding variable because regular exercise is both
related to moderate wine consumption and to heart disease risk.
Confounding variables can be especially problematic if they go
unmeasured in a study.
In a quantitative research study, researchers describe the relationships
among variables to build theories and to answer specific research
questions. Specifically, we use our theories and specification of variables
to generate hypotheses. A hypothesis is a prediction about a specific
event or relationship between variables. Researchers gather responses
from participants to questions about these variables. In other words, the
researcher measures responses from participants to variables. Several
texts provide detailed discussions about the scales of measurement for
variables (e.g., Isaac & Michael, 1981; Keppel, 1991; Kerlinger, 1979;
Thompson, 2006; Thorndike, 1997). A scale of measurement in
quantitative research would be the response options available to
participants on instruments or collected by the researcher observing
participants. Variables are measured as either categorical or continuous
(Creswell & Guetterman, 2018). Categorical scales have two types,
nominal and ordinal. Continuous scales also have two types: interval
and ratio. Nominal scales use categories that a participant would check,
such as level of education. A researcher might ask: How much education
do you have? The researcher provides the response options of none,
bachelor’s, or graduate education. An ordinal scale represents
categories for the participant to check but provides the categories in a
rank order. For example, a researcher would ask the question: Has your

--- Page 80 ---
adviser helped you select a major? The responses might be not at all, to
some extent, or to a great extent. An interval or ratio scale, in contrast,
contains a continuous scale. The scale of strongly agree to strongly
disagree represents a common example of a type of continuous scale. A
researcher would ask participants to respond to a question, such as, Do
you agree the economy is in a recession? Answers would be on a 1–5
scale from strongly agree, agree, and undecided to disagree and
strongly disagree.
Testing Causal Claims in Quantitative Research
With an understanding of variables, we will now discuss how the
variables might be related to each other, especially in a time sequence.
This introduces the concept of causality. A leading writer in this area has
been Blalock (1991). Causality means that we would expect variable X
to cause variable Y. An example illustrates the application of causality.
Does drinking one glass of red wine daily cause a reduced risk for a
heart attack? In this case, daily wine consumption is the X variable, and
a heart attack event would be the Y variable. One critically important
consideration in evaluating causal claims (like this red wine consumption
example) is whether an unmeasured third variable Z may cause the
outcome (see the definition of a confounding variable). For example, a
confounding Z variable (such as daily exercise) may be positively
associated with both moderate red wine consumption and a reduced
possibility of a heart attack. In quantitative research this third variable
can be a problem for establishing causality if unmeasured. We would not
want to mistakenly infer that moderate red wine consumption promotes
a healthy heart if it plays no causal role in reducing heart attacks. If you
aim to test a causal claim about the relationship between two or more
variables in your quantitative study, the best choice is to conduct a true
experiment, which will provide more control over potential unmeasured
variables (see Chapter 8). If you are less interested in testing a causal
claim or if you cannot conduct an experiment, then survey methods can
test claims about hypothesized associations between variables (see
Chapter 8). For example, you may be interested in first establishing if a
positive association exists between moderate daily red wine
consumption and clinical markers of heart disease risk using correlation
analysis. Indeed, epidemiological health science studies highlight a
positive association between moderate daily red wine consumption (1–2
drinks per day) and a 20% reduction in risk for heart disease (e.g.,
Szmitko & Verma, 2005).

--- Page 81 ---
Variables influencing other variables introduces the concept of temporal
order. Temporal order means that one variable precedes another in
time. Because of this time ordering, one variable affects or predicts
another variable. Temporal order also means that quantitative
researchers think about variables in an order from left to right (Punch,
2014) and order the variables in purpose statements, research
questions, and visual models in this way.
Stating Theories in Quantitative Research
How does the causal linking of variables appear in a research study?
Researchers state their theories in research proposals in several ways,
such as a series of hypotheses, if-then logic statements, or visual
models. First, some researchers state theories in the form of
interconnected hypotheses. For example, Hopkins (1964) conveyed his
theory of influence processes as a series of 15 hypotheses. Some of the
hypotheses are as follows (we have slightly altered several hypotheses
to remove gender-specific pronouns):
The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s centrality.
The greater one’s centrality, the greater one’s observability.
The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s observability.
The greater one’s centrality, the greater one’s conformity.
The higher one’s rank, the greater one’s conformity.
The greater one’s observability, the greater one’s conformity.
The greater one’s conformity, the greater one’s observability. (p. 51)
A second way is to state a theory as a series of if-then statements that
explain why one would expect the independent variables to influence or
cause the dependent variables. For example, Homans (1950) explained
a theory of interaction:
If the frequency of interaction between two or more persons
increases, the degree of their liking for one another will

--- Page 82 ---
increase, and vice versa. . . . Persons who feel sentiments of
liking for one another will express those sentiments in activities
over and above the activities of the external system, and these
activities may further strengthen the sentiments of liking. The
more frequently persons interact with one another, the more
alike in some respects both their activities and their sentiments
tend to become. (pp. 112, 118, 120)
Third, an author may present a theory as a visual model. It is helpful to
translate variables into a visual picture. Blalock (1969, 1985, 1991)
advocated for causal modeling and recasted verbal theories into causal
models so that a reader could visualize the interconnections of variables.
Two simplified examples are presented here. As shown in Figure 3.1,
three independent variables influence a single dependent variable,
mediated by the influence of two intervening variables. A diagram such
as this shows the possible causal sequence among variables leading to
modeling through path analysis and more advanced analyses using
multiple measures of variables as found in structural equation modeling
(see Kline, 1998). At an introductory level, Duncan (1985) provided
useful suggestions about the notation for constructing these visual causal
diagrams:
Position the dependent variables on the right in the diagram and the
independent variables on the left.
Use one-way arrows leading from each determining variable to each
variable dependent on it.
Indicate the strength of the relationship among variables by inserting
valence signs on the paths. Use positive or negative valences to
infer relationships.
Use two-headed arrows connected to show unanalyzed
relationships between variables not dependent upon other
relationships in the model.
With additional notation, researchers can construct more complicated
causal diagrams. Figure 3.1 portrays a basic model of limited variables,
such as typically found in a survey research study. A variation on this
theme is to have independent variables in which control and experimental
groups are compared between levels of one independent variable on an

--- Page 83 ---
outcome (dependent variable). As shown in Figure 3.2, two groups on
variable X are compared in terms of their influence on Y, the dependent
variable. This design is a between-groups experimental design (see
Chapter 8). The same rules of notation previously discussed apply.
Description
Figure 3.1 Three Predictor Variables Influence a Single
Dependent Variable Mediated by Two Intervening Variables

--- Page 84 ---
Figure 3.2 Two Groups With Different Treatment on X Are
Compared in Terms of Y
These two models are meant only to introduce possibilities for
connecting independent and dependent variables to build theories. More
complicated designs employ multiple independent and dependent
variables in elaborate models of causation (Blalock, 1969, 1985, 1991).
For example, Jungnickel (1990), in a doctoral dissertation proposal
about research productivity among faculty in pharmacy schools,
presented a complex visual model, as shown in Figure 3.3. Jungnickel
asked what factors influence a faculty member’s scholarly research
performance. After identifying these factors in the literature, he adapted
a theoretical framework found in nursing research (Megel et al., 1987)
and developed a visual model portraying the relationship among these
factors, following the rules for constructing a model introduced earlier.
He listed the independent variables on the far left, the intervening
variables in the middle, and the dependent variables on the right. The
direction of influence flowed from the left to the right, and he used plus
and minus signs to indicate the hypothesized direction. In this figure, an
endogenous variable means that variables influence other variables. In
this example, tenure standards and type of faculty appointment influence
workload and pressure to conduct research. Arrows in the diagram
show this relationship. An exogeneous variable is one not caused by
other variables in the causal model. In Figure 3.3, prior research training
or type of appointment are exogenous variables, for example.
Placement of Quantitative Theories
Where are theories placed in a quantitative a research study? In
quantitative studies, one uses theory deductively and places it toward
the beginning of the proposed study. With the objective of testing or
verifying a theory, the researcher advances a theory, collects data to
test it, and reflects on its confirmation or disconfirmation. The theory
becomes a framework for the entire study, an organizing model for the
research questions or hypotheses and for the data collection procedure.
The deductive model of thinking used in a quantitative study is shown in
Figure 3.4. The researcher tests or verifies a theory by examining
hypotheses or questions derived from it. These hypotheses or questions
contain variables (or constructs) that the researcher needs to define.
Writing a Quantitative Theoretical Perspective

--- Page 85 ---
Using these ideas, the following presents a model for writing a
quantitative theoretical perspective section into a research plan. Assume
the researcher’s task is to identify a theory to explain the relationship
between independent and dependent variables.
Description
Figure 3.3 A Visual Model of a Theory of Faculty Scholarly
Performance
Source: Jungnickel (1990). Reprinted with permission.

--- Page 86 ---
Description
Figure 3.4 The Deductive Approach Typically Used in
Quantitative Research
1. Look in the scientific literature for existing theories explaining the
phenomenon you aim to study and understand. If suitable existing
theories are not available, develop your own theory.
2. Also examine prior studies addressing the topic or a closely related
topic. What theories did the authors use? Limit the number of
theories and identify one or two theories to explain the central
hypothesis or major research question.
3. As mentioned earlier, ask the rainbow question bridging the
independent and dependent variables: What explains why the
independent variable(s) would influence the dependent variables?
Under what contexts and for whom does this apply?
4. Script out the theory section. Follow these lead sentences: “The
theory I will use is _____ (name the theory). It was developed by
_____ (identify the origin, source, or developer of the theory), and it
was used to study _____ (identify the studies applying the theory).
This theory indicates _____ (identify the propositions or hypotheses
in the theory). As applied to my study, this theory holds that I would
expect my independent variable(s) _____ (state independent
variables) to influence or explain the dependent variable(s) _____
(state dependent variables) because _____ (provide a rationale
based on the logic of the theory).”

--- Page 87 ---
Thus, the topics to include in a quantitative theory discussion are the
theory to be used, its central hypotheses or propositions, the information
about past theory use and its application, and statements as to how it
relates to a proposed study. Example 3.1, which contains a passage by
Crutchfield (1986) from her dissertation, illustrates the use of this model.
Example 3.1 A Quantitative Theory Section
Crutchfield (1986) wrote a doctoral dissertation titled Locus of
Control, Interpersonal Trust, and Scholarly Productivity. By
surveying nursing educators, her intent was to determine if locus
of control and interpersonal trust affected the levels of
publications of the faculty. Her dissertation included a separate
section in the introductory chapter titled “Theoretical
Perspective,” which follows. It includes these points:
The theory she planned to use
The central hypotheses of the theory
Information about who has used the theory and its
applicability
An adaptation of the theory to variables in her study using if-
then logic
We have added annotations in italics to mark key passages that
follow these steps in the Theoretical Perspective section of her
dissertation.
Theoretical Perspective
In formulation of a theoretical perspective for studying the
scholarly productivity of faculty, social learning theory provides a
useful prototype. This conception of behavior attempts to achieve
a balanced synthesis of cognitive psychology with the principles
of behavior modification (Bower & Hilgard, 1981). Basically, this
unified theoretical framework “approaches the explanation of
human behavior in terms of a continuous (reciprocal) interaction

--- Page 88 ---
between cognitive, behavioral, and environmental determinants”
(Bandura, 1977, p. vii). [Author identifies the theory for the
study.]
While social learning theory accepts the application of
reinforcements such as shaping principles, it tends to see the role
of rewards as both conveying information about the optimal
response and providing incentive motivation for a given act
because of the anticipated reward. In addition, the learning
principles of this theory place special emphasis on the important
roles played by vicarious, symbolic, and self-regulating
processes (Bandura, 1971).
Social learning theory not only deals with learning, but also seeks
to describe how a group of social and personal competencies (so
called personality) could evolve out of social conditions within
which the learning occurs. It also addresses techniques of
personality assessment (Mischel, 1968), and behavior
modification in clinical and educational settings (Bandura, 1977;
Bower & Hilgard, 1981; Rotter, 1954). [Author describes social
learning theory.]
Further, the principles of social learning theory have been applied
to a wide range of social behavior such as competitiveness,
aggressiveness, deviance, and pathological behavior (Bandura &
Walters, 1963; Bandura, 1977; Mischel, 1968; Miller & Dollard,
1941; Rotter, 1954; Staats, 1975). [Author describes the use of
the theory.]
Explaining social learning theory, Rotter (1954) indicated four
classes of variables must be considered: behavior, expectancies,
reinforcement, and psychological situations. A general formula for
behavior was proposed which states: “the potential for a behavior
to occur in any specific psychological situation is the function of
the expectancy that the behavior will lead to a particular
reinforcement in that situation and the value of that
reinforcement” (Rotter, 1975, p. 57).
Expectancy within the formula refers to the perceived degree of
certainty (or probability) of a causal relationship between
behavior and rewards. This construct of generalized expectancy
has been defined as internal locus of control when an individual
believes reinforcements are a function of specific behavior, or as
external locus of control when the effects are attributed to luck,
fate, or powerful others. The perceptions of causal relationships

--- Page 89 ---
need not be absolute positions, but rather tend to vary in degree
along a continuum depending upon previous experiences and
situational complexities (Rotter, 1966). [Author explains variables
in the theory.]
In the application of social learning theory to this study of
scholarly productivity, the four classes of variables identified by
Rotter (1954) will be defined in the following manner.
1. Scholarly productivity is the desired behavior or activity.
2. Locus of control is the generalized expectancy whether
rewards are or are not dependent upon specific behaviors.
3. Reinforcements are the rewards from scholarly work and the
value attached to these rewards.
4. The educational institution is the psychological situation
which furnishes many of the rewards for scholarly
productivity.
With these specific variables, the formula for behavior which was
developed by Rotter (1975) would be adapted to read: The
potential for scholarly behavior to occur within an educational
institution is a function of the expectancy this activity will lead to
specific rewards and of the value the faculty member places on
these rewards. In addition, the interaction of interpersonal trust
with locus of control must be considered in relation to the
expectancy of attaining rewards through behaviors (Rotter,
1967). Finally, certain characteristics, such as educational
preparation, chronological age, post-doctoral fellowships, tenure,
or full-time versus part-time employment may be associated with
the scholarly productivity of nurse faculty in a manner like that
seen within other disciplines. [Author applied the concepts to her
study.]
The following statement represents the underlying logic for
designing and conducting this study. If faculty believe: (a) their
efforts and actions in producing scholarly works will lead to
rewards (locus of control), (b) others can be relied upon to follow
through on their promises (interpersonal trust), (c) the rewards
for scholarly activity are worthwhile (reward values), and (d) the
rewards are available within their discipline or institution
(institutional setting), then they will attain high levels of scholarly
productivity (pp. 12–16). [Author concluded with the if-then logic
to relate the independent variables to the dependent variables.]

--- Page 90 ---
QUALITATIVE THEORY USE
The use of theory varies in qualitative research. It appears as a
deductive explanation, as a theoretical standpoint, and as an end point
for a study. Its location in a proposal or study also varies.
Variation in Theory Use in Qualitative Research
First, like in quantitative research, theory in qualitative research can be a
broad, deductive explanation for behavior and attitudes and complete
with variables, constructs, and hypotheses. For example, ethnographers
employ cultural themes or aspects to study in their qualitative projects,
such as social control, language, stability and change, or social
organization, such as kinship or families (see Wolcott’s 2008 discussion
about texts addressing cultural topics in anthropology). Themes in this
context provide a ready-made series of hypotheses tested from the
literature. Anthropologists use broad explanations to study the culture-
sharing behavior and attitudes of people. This approach is popular in
qualitative health science research. Investigators begin with a theoretical
or conceptual model, such as the adoption of health practices or an
assessment of the quality of life.
Second, researchers increasingly use a theoretical standpoint in
qualitative research to provide an overall orienting lens for the study
questions about gender, class, and race (or other issues of marginalized
groups). This lens becomes a transformative perspective to bring about
change, lift the voices of underrepresented groups, and uncover largely
hidden assumptions of individuals. It shapes the questions asked,
informs how data are collected and analyzed, and provides a call for
action or change.
Qualitative research in the 1980s transformed by broadening its scope
of inquiry and including theoretical lenses. The standpoint guides
researchers about important issues to examine (e.g., marginalization,
empowerment, oppression, power) and people studied (e.g., women,
low economic social status, ethnic and racial groups, sexual orientation,
disability). It also indicates how the researchers position themselves in
the qualitative study (e.g., up front or biased from personal, cultural, and
historical contexts) and in the final report (e.g., without further
marginalizing individuals, by collaborating with participants) suggesting
recommendations for changes to improve lives and society. In critical
ethnography, for example, researchers begin with a theory informing

--- Page 91 ---
their studies. This theory emphasizes the need for people’s emancipation
or repression (Thomas, 1993).
Several qualitative theoretical standpoint perspectives available to the
researcher include the following:
Feminist perspectives view women’s oppressive situations and the
institutions framing those situations as problematic. Research topics
include changing policy issues for women to realize social justice or
eliminating oppressive situations for women (Olesen, 2000).
Racialized discourses raise important questions about who controls
knowledge production, particularly for people and communities of
color (Ladson-Billings, 2000).
Critical theory perspectives address empowering human beings to
transcend the constraints placed on them by race, class, and
gender (Fay, 1987).
Queer theory focuses on individual identity of lesbians, gays,
bisexual people, straight people (i.e., LGBTQ2A+). The research
using this approach restricts objectifying these individuals, seeks to
improve their culture and politics, and highlights the voices and
experiences of individuals (Gamson, 2000).
Disability inquiry addresses understanding this population’s
sociocultural perspectives allowing them to take control over their
lives rather than a biological understanding of disability (Mertens,
2009).
Rossman and Rallis (2012) captured the sense of theory as critical and
postmodern perspectives in qualitative inquiry:
As the 20th century draws to a close, traditional social science
has come under increasing scrutiny and attack as those
espousing critical and postmodern perspectives challenge
objectivist assumptions and traditional norms for the conduct of
research. The critical tradition is alive and well in the social
sciences. Postmodernists reject the notion that knowledge is
definite and univocal. Central to this attack are four interrelated
assertions: (a) Research fundamentally involves issues of

--- Page 92 ---
power; (b) the research report is not transparent but rather it is
authored by a raced, gendered, classed, and politically oriented
individual; (c) race, class, and gender (the canonical triumvirate
to which we would add sexual orientation, able-bodiedness,
and first language, among others) are crucial for understanding
experience; and (d) historically, traditional research has
silenced members of oppressed and marginalized groups. (p.
91)
Third, distinct from the deductive use and theoretical standpoint
orientation, qualitative studies apply theory as a theoretical end point for
a study. This theoretical end point means that the qualitative study
ends with a theoretical model, a theory, or a conceptual model.
Qualitative research is an inductive process building from data, to broad
themes, and to a generalized model or theory (see Punch, 2014). The
logic of this inductive approach is shown in Figure 3.5.
The researcher begins by gathering detailed information from
participants and then forms this information into categories or themes.
These themes are developed into broad patterns, theories, or
generalizations and compared with personal experiences or with existing
literature on the topic.
The development of themes and categories into patterns, theories, or
generalizations suggests varied end points for qualitative studies. For
example, in case study research, Stake (1995) adds to a propositional
generalization (the researcher’s summary of interpretations and claims)
the researcher’s own personal experiences, called “naturalistic
generalizations” (p. 86). As another example, grounded theory provides
a different end point. Inquirers plan to discover and advance a theory
grounded in information from participants (Strauss & Corbin, 1998).
Lincoln and Guba (1985) referred to “pattern theories” as explanations
developing during naturalistic or qualitative research. Rather than the
deductive form found in quantitative studies, these pattern theories or
generalizations represent interconnected thoughts or parts linked to a
whole.

--- Page 93 ---
Description
Figure 3.5 The Inductive Logic of Research in a Qualitative
Study
Fourth, some qualitative studies have no explicit theory. However, no
qualitative study begins from pure observation, and prior conceptual
structure composed of theory and method often provides the starting
point for all observations (Schwandt, 2014). Still, in some qualitative
studies one sees no explicit theoretical orientation, such as in
phenomenology, in which inquirers attempt to build the essence of
experience from participants (e.g., see Riemen, 1986). The inquirer
constructs a rich, detailed description of a central phenomenon.
Our recommendations on theory use in a qualitative proposal are as
follows:
Decide if theory is to be used in the qualitative proposal.

--- Page 94 ---
If used, then identify how the theory is applied in the study, such as
an up-front explanation, the researcher’s standpoint, or as an end
point.
Locate the theory in the proposal early in the study or at the end.
Locating the Theory in Qualitative Research
How theory use affects its placement in a qualitative study. In studies
with a cultural theme or a theoretical lens, the theory occurs in the
opening passages of the study (see Example 3.2). The theory may
appear at a study’s beginning and be modified or adjusted based on
participant views. Lather (1986) qualified the use of theory in grounded
theory studies:
Building empirically grounded theory requires a reciprocal
relationship between data and theory. Data must be allowed to
generate propositions in a dialectical manner permitting a priori
theoretical frameworks, but which keeps a framework from
becoming the container into which the data must be poured. (p.
267)
Example 3.2 A Theory Early in a Qualitative Study
Murguia et al. (1991) studied the integration of 24 Hispanic and
Native American students into a college social system. They
were curious about how ethnicity influenced social integration,
and they began by relating the participants’ experiences to a
theoretical model, the Tinto model of social integration. They felt
the model had been “incompletely conceptualized and, as a
consequence, only imprecisely understood and measured” (p.
433).
Thus, the model was not tested, as one would find in a
quantitative project, but modified. At the end of the study, the
authors refined Tinto’s model and advanced their modification that
described how ethnicity functions.

--- Page 95 ---
In contrast to this approach, in qualitative studies with an end
point of a theory (e.g., a grounded theory), a pattern, or a
generalization, the theory emerges at the study’s end.
Researchers can present the theory as a diagram, a visual
representation of relationships among concepts.
As Example 3.3 shows, we developed a visual model for
interrelated variables. We derived this model inductively from
participant comments and placed the model at the end of the
study.
Example 3.3 A Theory at the End of a Qualitative Study
Using a national database of 33 interviews with academic
department chairpersons, we developed a grounded theory
interrelating variables (or categories) of chair influence on
scholarly faculty performance (Creswell & Brown, 1992).
Grounded theory meant that we grounded our theory in the views
of participants. The theory section came into the article as the
last section where we presented a visual model of the inductively-
developed theory. In addition, we also advanced directional
hypotheses logically following from the model. Moreover, in the
section on the model and the hypotheses, we compared the
participant results with results from other studies and the
literature’s theoretical discussions. For example, we stated the
following:
This proposition and its sub-propositions represent
unusual, even contrary evidence, to our expectations.
Contrary to proposition 2.1, we expected that the
career stages would be similar not in type but in the
range of issues. Instead we found the issues for post-
tenure faculty covered almost all the possible problems
on the list. Why were the tenured faculty’s needs more
extensive than non-tenured faculty? The research
productivity literature suggests one’s research
performance does not decline with the award of tenure
(Holley 1977). Perhaps diffuse career goals of post-
tenure faculty expand the possibilities for issue “types.”
In any case, this sub-proposition focuses on the

--- Page 96 ---
understudied career group Furniss (1981) reminds us
needs to be examined in more detail (p. 58).
MIXED METHODS THEORY USE
In contrast to the use of theory in qualitative research, theories are
discipline-based or social justice theories in mixed methods research. It
is important to use a theory in mixed methods research and distinguish
between the use of a worldview and a theory.
Types of Mixed Methods Theory Use
There are two types of theory use in mixed methods studies: discipline-
based and social justice. Both forms have emerged in the mixed
methods literature (see Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018).
The theory can be considered a discipline-based theory drawn from
the social, behavioral, or health science literature. Examples of
discipline-based theories would be organizational theories, leadership
theories, adoption theories, attribution theories, health promotion
theories, and the like. These theories typically identify variables or
constructs, interrelate them, and form and explain expected results for
individuals and organizations.
An example of a discipline-based theory in health science is found in a
mixed methods study about chronic pain and its management through
learned resourcefulness by Kennett et al. (2008). These authors
presented a mixed methods study to understand how learned
resourcefulness empowers individuals. Specifically, the study examined
the impact of a cognitive-behavioral chronic pain management program
on self-management. They also explored how resourcefulness and a
sense of self-directedness influenced self-management skills for chronic
pain. They used Rosenbaum’s (1990) theory of self-control. They
gathered quantitative measures on Rosenbaum’s Self-Control Schedule
(SCS) and collected interviews with patients coping with chronic pain. In
the opening paragraph of their study, they advanced the purpose:

--- Page 97 ---
Taking a critical realist perspective informed by Rosenbaum’s
(1990, 2000) model of self-control, we combine a quantitative
measure of learned resourcefulness with a qualitative text-
based analysis to characterize the processes in the self-
management of pain for high—and low—resourceful clients
following a multimodel treatment-based pain program. (p. 318)
Following this passage, they advanced a model of learned
resourcefulness to guide their study. They introduced the major
components of Rosenbaum’s model. The research literature on
resourcefulness followed this introduction as an important predictor of
adopting healthy behavior and included a discussion of a Rosenbaum
experiment relating resourcefulness to coping with pain. The authors
then discussed the factors of the model leading to self-control, such as
process-regulating cognitions (e.g., supporting family and friends),
coping strategies (e.g., ability to cope with such pain), and staying in (or
dropping out of) programs. The authors at this point might have drawn a
diagram of the theory to be explicit about factors influencing self-control.
However, they provided a series of questions drawn from Rosenbaum’s
model and the literature to guide their study. Toward the end of the
article, they revisited the factors leading to self-management and
presented a diagram of the most salient factors.
The theory used in a mixed method study could also be a social justice
theory, such as feminist research, racial or ethnic research, disability
research, lifestyle research, and the like. These social justice theories
help give voice to populations underrepresented and marginalized in our
society.
A mixed method article by Hodgkin (2008) illustrates the use of a
feminist emancipatory lens in a mixed methods study. Hodgkin examined
if men and women have different social capital profiles and why women
participated more in social and community activities than in civic activities
in Australia. Her stated aim was to “demonstrate the use of mixed
methods in feminist research” (p. 296). Toward the beginning of her
article, she discussed the feminist perspective, such as drawing attention
to the lack of gender focus in social capital studies, using qualitative and
quantitative research giving voice to women’s experiences, and locating
her study within the transformative paradigm (worldview). She found a
difference in social capital between men and women in her results. She
then explored in a second phase the viewpoints of women, noting
women’s involvement in informal social participation and community

--- Page 98 ---
participation. Participation in civic levels of involvement were low, and
themes resulting from women were related to wanting to be a “good
mother,” wanting to avoid social isolation, and wanting to be an active
citizen.
A social justice theory perspective is incorporated into a mixed methods
study in these ways:
Indicating a framework in the opening passages of a study (e.g.,
feminist, participatory)
Mentioning this framework early in a study as it relates to a
marginalized or underrepresented community and specific issues
faced by the community (e.g., oppression, power)
Lodging this framework within a theoretical body of literature, such
as feminist literature or racial literature
Involving the community of interest in research (e.g., in the data
collection)
Taking a stand with the research question—advocating in its
orientation (e.g., inequality does exist and the research will set out
to substantiate it)
Advancing in the design the collection, analysis, and integration of
both quantitative and qualitative methods within the transformative
framework
Talking about researchers’ experiences and how the experiences
and background shapes understanding participants and issues
under study
Ending the study by advocating for change to help the population
under study and the issue
Importance of a Theory
A mixed methods researcher chooses one or more theories to use in
their study. The use of theories in mixed methods research has been
suggested by several mixed method authors, such as DeCuir-Gunby and

--- Page 99 ---
Schutz (2018) and Evans et al. (2011). They maintain it is important to
use in mixed methods research because theory:
provides a framework for organizing and reporting the quantitative
and qualitative data;
brings together separate investigations or studies and reports
common concepts or ideas;
develops a common understanding among research team members,
stakeholders, and funder of research about the underlying
framework for a study;
provides a prediction for what the researcher hopes to learn;
links concepts and ideas, often in a temporal order; and
provides a visual model for understanding the overall direction of a
study.
(Adapted from Evans et al., 2011)
Distinctions Between a Theory and a
Worldview
A theory or a theoretical orientation differs from a worldview. As shown
in Figure 3.6 (adapted from Crotty, 1998), a worldview relates to the
beliefs and values of the researcher and how these inform a study (see
Chapter 1). In Crotty’s model, worldviews operate at an abstract level in
the research process and may or may not be explicitly stated, as noted
in Chapter 1. Theories, in contrast, are less abstract, drawn from the
literature, and provide a guiding perspective for designing many research
process aspects. From theories, methodological approaches to design
follow, such as mixed methods research, and then data collection
methods.

--- Page 100 ---
Description
Figure 3.6 Four Levels for Developing a Research Study
(Adapted from Crotty, 1998)
A Theoretically Driven Mixed Methods Study
One theory issue is whether a mixed methods study should give
theoretical priority to quantitative or qualitative research (see Creswell &
Plano Clark, in press). Morse and Niehaus (2009) contended that mixed
methods studies are all theoretically driven. This means that either
quantitative or qualitative research holds a major emphasis in the study.
Authors of mixed methods studies do mention their drive, such as the
phenomenon of caregiving in Mexican American families (Evans et al.,
2011). The authors admit to a theoretically driven inductive approach
based on the life course perspective (their theoretical perspective). A
study can feature either the quantitative or the qualitative use of theory.
However, it is difficult for a reader of studies to determine the scope of
the theory in a study. Also, the naming of a “driven” orientation to theory
creates an unhealthy power imbalance between quantitative and
qualitative research. Our stance is that both forms of research are
valuable, and a key advantage of mixed methods research is giving both
forms of research equal importance.

--- Page 101 ---
What Theory Informs
A theory can specifically inform many aspects of a mixed methods
project. We return to the Evans et al. (2011) study in the field of nursing
and the theory of a Life Course Perspective toward caregiving by
Mexican Americans. This study provides a good illustration of
incorporating the Life Course Perspective into many facets of the study.
A summary of their theory use in the study follows:
The theory is visualized through a model in their article. This model
shows the life course perspective trajectory on caregiving. This
figure is helpful for stakeholders, team members, and funders.
They drew constructs (variables) from the theory and incorporated
them in their study aims.
From the theory, they drew stories from the literature about this
model to recruit participants to the study.
The theory constructs informed the qualitative questions addressed
and the quantitative instruments and measures.
The theory also provided “starter codes and themes” for the
qualitative data analysis and for hypothesized relationships for the
quantitative data analysis.
The theory contributed to useful typologies of findings, led to
working hypotheses, and illustrated the development of caregiving
over time.
We would add to this list of ways to incorporate theory in a mixed
methods study. Our approach would be to closely tie the theory to the
research design. In the Evans et al. (2011) project, they looked for
congruency between their quantitative and qualitative data. Later, in
Chapter 10, we will view this approach as a mixed methods research
“convergent design.” It would have been helpful if Evans et al. had
related the use of theory to their convergent design. Their Life Course
Perspective might have informed the quantitative component, the
qualitative component, or both in a mixed methods study. Further, in
presenting a diagram of the type of their mixed methods design (see
Chapter 10), they might have identified the theory (and its name)

--- Page 102 ---
explicitly in the diagram. Thus, the theory informs certain components of
the mixed methods design and is made explicit in the design discussion.
Example 3.4 A Discipline-Based Theory in a Mixed
Methods Study
Clark and Plano Clark (2019) illustrate the use of a discipline-
based theory in psychology. This project used the theory of
positive psychology (a discipline-based theory) as a guiding
perspective. They augmented it with social cognitive theory, self-
determination theory, and social cognitive career theory. The
study examined the relationship between grit (individual passion
and perseverance) and career success for working adults. Four
hundred twenty-three adults completed four sets of scales and
measures in the quantitative phase. The qualitative follow-up
phase comprised face-to-face interviews with five individuals.
Positive psychology guided the selection of the quantitative
measures in the quantitative phase and the selection of
participants in the qualitative phase. Positive psychology also
informed the interview protocol for the qualitative data collection.
Codes to emerge from the qualitative data collection were
informed by the social cognitive, self-determination, and social
cognitive career theories. The authors stated that positive
psychology was used as a lens “through which to frame the
research design, case selection, and interpretation of results and
findings.” (p.104). Specific use of theory occurred in the data
collection and data analysis procedures. In the end, the authors
recommended using a theory to inform the design and methods
of each project phase.
Summary
Theory use varies in quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods
research. Researchers use theory in a quantitative study to
provide an explanation or prediction about the relationships
among variables in the study. A theory explains how and why the
variables are related, acting as a bridge between or among the
variables. Theory may be broad or narrow in scope, and
researchers state their theories in several ways, such as a series

--- Page 103 ---
of hypotheses, if-then logic statements, or visual models.
Theories contain variables, and it is important to understand the
different types of variables, especially independent, mediating,
and dependent variables. Variables in quantitative research
interrelate through models called causal models. Investigators
advance the theory typically at the beginning of the study in the
literature review. They also include them with the hypotheses or
research questions or place them in a separate section. A script
can help design the theory section for a research proposal.
In qualitative research, inquirers employ theory as a broad
explanation, much like in quantitative research, such as in
ethnographies. It may also be a standpoint lens or perspective
related to gender, class, race, or some combination of these.
Theory also appears as a qualitative study end point, a
generated theory, a pattern, or a generalization emerging
inductively from data collection and analysis. Grounded theorists,
for example, generate a theory grounded from participant views
and place it as the conclusion in the study. Some qualitative
studies do not include an explicit theory and present descriptive
research of the central phenomenon.
Mixed methods researchers use theory drawn from the literature
or a perspective to advance the needs of special populations.
Theory takes two forms: a discipline-based theory or a social
justice theory. A discipline-based theory placed at the beginning
of studies provides an explanation for the quantitative and
(perhaps) qualitative components (e.g., data collection, analysis,
interpretation) of a study and informs the findings and results. A
social justice theory is used in mixed methods. It is a lens for
looking at a problem recognizing the non-neutrality of knowledge,
the pervasive influence of human interests, and issues such as
power and social relationships. A social justice mixed methods
study helps improve the lives of underrepresented groups. A
useful guide in this chapter addresses the many phases of
research that a theory can inform. Especially important is linking
the theory to the type of design and specifying how the theory
informs the quantitative, qualitative, or overall methods in a study.
KEY TERMS

--- Page 104 ---
Categorical scales 56
Causality 56
Confounding variable 55
Continuous scales 56
Dependent variables 54
Discipline-based theory 69
Hypothesis 56
Independent variables 54
Intervening or mediating variables 55
Moderating variables 55
Outcome variables 55
Predictor variables 55
Scale of measurement 56
Social justice theory 70
Temporal order 57
Theoretical end point 66
Theoretical standpoint 65
Theory in quantitative research 53
Variable 54
WRITING EXERCISES

--- Page 105 ---
1. Search one of the computer databases mentioned in
Chapter 2. Locate a journal article with a theory. Identify the
variables mentioned in the theory, and discuss whether the
authors of the article presented a causal model of the
theory.
2. Again, search the literature for a qualitative study that uses
theory as an end point for the study. This means that the
author presents a theoretical model at the end of the study.
What general process did the author use to develop this
model?
3. This time, search the literature for a mixed methods study
that uses a theory. Discuss how the author used the theory
to inform the mixed methods design and its quantitative,
qualitative, and overall methods.
Additional Readings
Bachman, R. D., & Schutt, R. K. (2017). Fundamentals of
research in criminology and criminal justice (4th ed.). SAGE.
Causation represents a key component in understanding
quantitative theory use. In their book, Ronet Bachman and
Russell Schutt include an easy-to-understand chapter on
causation and experimentation. They discuss the meaning of
causation, the criteria for achieving it, and how to use information
to form causal conclusions. Especially useful is their discussion
about the conditions necessary for determining causality.
Blalock, H. (1991). Are there any constructive alternatives to
causal modeling? Sociological Methodology, 21, 325–335.
For many years, Herbert Blalock’s ideas have provided an
understanding of causal modeling in the social sciences. In this
thoughtful essay, Blalock stated that correlational methods do not
equate to causation. He talked about the potential of “lagged”
effects in understanding causation, that is, variables that emerge
over time and can be difficult to specify. He called for making
assumptions explicit in causal mechanisms in experimental
designs. With these points in mind, Blalock called for the use of

--- Page 106 ---
more complex causal models to test important questions in social
research.
Evans, B. C., Coon, D. W., & Ume, E. (2011). Use of theoretical
frameworks as a pragmatic guide for mixed methods studies: A
methodological necessity? Journal of Mixed Methods Research,
5(4), 276–292.
Researchers using theories in mixed methods research can profit
from a guide that describes ways to incorporate theory
throughout a project. Bronwynne Evans, David Coon, and Ebere
Ume provide such a guide. This article advances theory
frameworks useful in a mixed methods study, such as in the
design, addressing temporal causality, examining constructs in
the theory, using the theory to code and develop themes, and
formulating propositions. They illustrate the use of these theory
applications with an empirical study from nursing using the Life
Course Perspective as a theory to examine caregiver burden
among Mexican American caregivers.
Flinders, D. J., & Mills, G. E. (Eds.). (1993). Theory and
concepts in qualitative research: Perspectives from the field.
Columbia University, Teachers College Press.
Understanding how theories work in qualitative research needs
further attention. David Flinders and Geoffrey Mills have edited a
book about perspectives from the field—theory at work—as
described by different qualitative researchers. The chapters
illustrate little consensus about defining theory and whether it is a
vice or virtue. Further, theory operates at many levels in
research, such as formal theories, epistemological theories,
methodological theories, and meta-theories. Given this diversity,
it is best to see actual theory at work in qualitative studies, and
this volume illustrates practice from critical, personal, formal, and
educational criticism.
Mertens, D. M. (2003). Mixed methods and the politics of human
research: The transformative-emancipatory perspective. In A.
Tashakkori & C. Teddlie (Eds.), Handbook of mixed methods in
social and behavioral research (pp. 135–164). SAGE.
Historically, research methods have not concerned themselves
with the needs of marginalized groups and social justice.
Merten’s chapter explores the transformative-emancipatory
paradigm of research as a framework or lens for mixed methods

--- Page 107 ---
research. It has emerged from scholars from diverse ethnic and
racial groups, people with disabilities, and feminists. A unique
aspect of her chapter is how she weaves together this paradigm
of thinking and the steps in the process of conducting mixed
methods research.
Thomas, G. (1997). What’s the use of theory? Harvard
Educational Review, 67(1), 75–104.
Some individuals question whether a theory should be used in
research. Gary Thomas presents a reasoned critique of the use
of theory in educational inquiry. He notes the definitions of theory
and maps out four broad uses: as (a) thinking and reflection, (b)
tighter or looser hypotheses, (c) explanations for adding to
knowledge in different fields, and (d) formally expressed
statements in science. Having noted these uses, he then
embraces the thesis that theory unnecessarily structures and
constrains thought.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The three predictor variables are uppercase X subscript 1, uppercase X
subscript 2, and uppercase X subscript 3. The two intervening variables
are uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2. The
dependent variable is uppercase Z subscript 1. uppercase X subscript 2
is interconnected with uppercase X subscript 1 and uppercase X
subscript 3. Arrows labeled with a positive sign point from uppercase X
subscript 1 to uppercase Y subscript 1, and from uppercase X subscript
2 to uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2. An arrow
labeled with a negative sign points from uppercase X subscript 3 to
uppercase Y subscript 2. Arrows labeled with a positive sign point from
uppercase Y subscript 1 and uppercase Y subscript 2 to uppercase Z
subscript 1.
Back to Figure
The exogenous variables are as follows:
Demographic variables

--- Page 108 ---
Institutional tenure standards
Tenure-track appointment
College in health sciences center
Self-perception as researcher
Prior research training
Type of appointment, chair versus faculty
The independent or endogenous variables are as follows:
Workload, non-research
Pressure to conduct research
Collaboration
Resources
Support from colleagues
Support from department chair
The dependent variable is scholarly performance and includes the
following:
Presentations, non-research
Presentations, research
Journal articles, non-refereed
Refereed articles, research
Refereed articles, non-research
Book chapters

--- Page 109 ---
Books
Federal grants, approved
Federal grants, funded
Non-federal grants
Contracts
Arrows labeled with a positive sign are between the following variables:
From self-perception as researcher to institutional tenure standards,
tenure-track appointment, college in health sciences center, and
scholarly performance.
From prior research training to self-perception as researcher.
From tenure-track appointment to pressure to conduct research,
collaboration, resources, and support from department chair.
From college in health sciences sector to collaboration and
resources.
From pressure to conduct research, collaboration, resources, and
support from department chair to scholarly performance.
Arrows labeled with a negative sign are between the following variables:
Tenure-track appointment to workload
Workload to scholarly performance
Arrows labeled with positive and negative signs are between the
following variables:
Demographic variables and type of appointment to scholarly
performance.

--- Page 110 ---
An arrow points from support from colleagues to scholarly performance.
Back to Figure
The stages from top to bottom are as follows:
Researcher tests or verifies a theory.
Researcher tests hypotheses or research questions from the
theory.
Researcher defines and operationalizes variables derived from the
theory.
Researcher measures variables using instruments to test
hypotheses.
Back to Figure
The stages from bottom to top are as follows:
Researcher gathers information, for example, interviews,
observations.
Researcher asks open-ended questions of participants or records
fieldnotes.
Researcher analyzes data to form themes or categories.
Researcher looks for broad patterns, generalizations, or theories
from themes or categories.
Researcher poses generalizations or theories from past
experiences and literature.
Back to Figure
The levels (top to bottom) are as follows:

--- Page 111 ---
Paradigm worldview: Beliefs, values of the researcher
Theoretical lens: For example, feminist, racial, substantive content
theories
Methodological approach: For example, ethnography, experiment,
mixed methods
Methods of data collection: For example, interviews, checklists,
instruments

--- Page 112 ---
CHAPTER 4 WRITING STRATEGIES AND ETHICAL
CONSIDERATIONS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify the nine key topics to include in a proposal or a research study.
2. Compare the differences in the structure of proposals for quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed methods research studies.
3. Evaluate the quality of your writing for conciseness, coherence, and unnecessary words.
4. Identify ethical issues and strategies for addressing them before conducting a study and
during and after a study.
INTRODUCTION
Before designing a proposal, plan the general structure or outline of the topics and their order. The
structure differs depending on a quantitative, qualitative, or a mixed methods project. Another
general consideration is to be aware of good writing practices that will help ensure a consistent and
easily readable proposal or research project. Affecting all phases of the study will be attending to
good ethical practices and anticipating issues. This chapter provides guidance for the overall
structure of proposals or projects, writing practices that make projects easy to read, and ethical
issues that need to be anticipated in research studies.
WRITING THE PROPOSAL
Before writing a proposal for a research study, consider the topics and format for qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods studies.
Topics Presented in a Proposal
It is helpful to consider early in planning a study the major topics that need to be addressed in a
proposal. These topics need to be interconnected to provide a cohesive picture of the entire project,
and they span all research studies, whether qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods. A good
place to start is examining Maxwell’s (2013) list of the core arguments that need to be advanced in
any proposal. We summarize them in our own words:
1. What do readers need to better understand your topic?
2. What do readers know about your topic?
3. What do you propose to study?
4. What is the setting, and who are the people you will study?
5. What methods do you plan to use to collect data?
6. How will you analyze the data?
7. How will you validate your findings?
8. What ethical issues will your study present?
9. What do preliminary results show about the feasibility and value of the proposed study?
If addressed adequately with a section devoted to each question, these nine questions constitute
the foundation of good research, and they provide the overall structure for a proposal. The inclusion
of validation, ethical considerations, preliminary results, and early evidence of practical significance
represents key elements often overlooked in discussions about proposed projects.

--- Page 113 ---
A Qualitative Proposal
Beyond these nine questions, it is also helpful to have an overall outline or general structure for
topics included in a proposal for a study. Unquestionably, in qualitative research, no one structure
prevails. However, guidance shown in several general outlines can help, especially for a student new
to the process of writing a thesis or dissertation. Here we propose two alternative qualitative
models. Example 4.1 draws on a constructivist or interpretivist worldview. Example 4.2 is based on
participatory or social justice (see worldviews in Chapter 1).
Example 4.1 A Qualitative Constructivist or Interpretivist Format
Introduction
Statement of the Problem (including existing literature, deficiencies in the literature, and
relevance of study for audiences)
Purpose of the Study
The Research Questions
Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory
Procedures
Qualitative Design (e.g., descriptive, ethnography, case study)
Role of the Researcher
Data Collection Procedures
Data Analysis Procedures
Proposed Narrative Structure for Findings
Strategies for Validation
Anticipated Ethical Issues
Preliminary Pilot Findings (if available)
Expected Impact and Significance of Study
References
Appendixes: Interview Questions and Protocol, Observational Forms, Timeline for the Study,
Proposed Budget, Summary of the Proposed Content of Each Chapter in the Final Study
In this example, the writer includes an introduction, procedures, ethical issues, preliminary findings,
and the expected impact of the study. A separate section reviewing the literature may be included,
but it is optional, as discussed in Chapter 2. Several appendixes may seem unusual. Developing a
timeline for the study and presenting a proposed budget provide useful information to committees,
although these sections are optional but highly recommended. Also, because the number and type
of chapters in qualitative research is highly variable, a summary of each chapter’s content in the final
study is helpful.
This format is like the constructivist or interpretivist format except that the inquirer identifies a
specific participatory or social justice framework used in the study (e.g., oppression, discrimination,

--- Page 114 ---
community involvement). Also, this format contains a collaborative form of data collection, and
mentions the anticipated changes resulting from the research study.
A Quantitative Proposal
For a quantitative study, the format conforms to sections typically found in quantitative studies
reported in journal articles. The form generally follows the model of an introduction and literature
review, method, results, and discussion. In planning a quantitative study and designing a dissertation
proposal, consider the following format as shown in Example 4.3.
Example 4.2 A Qualitative Participatory or Social Justice Format
Introduction
Statement of the Problem (including existing literature, deficiencies in the literature, and
relevance of study for audiences)
The Social Justice Theory (its major elements, past use, applicability to present study)
Purpose of the Study
The Research Questions
Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory
Procedures
Qualitative Design (descriptive, case study, etc.)
Role of the Researcher
Data Collection Procedures (including the collaborative approaches used with participants)
Data Analysis Procedures
Strategies for Validation
Proposed Narrative Structure for Findings
Anticipated Ethical Issues
Preliminary Pilot Findings (if available)
Significance of the Study and Transformative Changes Likely to Occur
References
Appendixes: Interview Questions and Protocol, Observational Forms, Timeline, Proposed
Budget, and a Summary of Proposed Chapters for the Final Study
Example 4.3 A Quantitative Format
Introduction and Literature Review

--- Page 115 ---
Statement of the Problem (issue, theory, existing literature about problem, deficiencies in
literature, relevance of study for audiences)
Purpose of the Study
Research Questions or Hypotheses
Method
Population, Sample, Participants, Recruitment of Participants
Type of Research Design (e.g., experimental, survey)
Procedure (procedures and variables, instruments and materials, ethical considerations)
Data Analysis Procedures
Preliminary Studies or Pilot Tests
Appendixes: Instruments and Materials, Timeline, Proposed Budget, Outline of Proposed
Chapters
Example 4.3 is a standard format for a social science study (see Miller & Salkind, 2002); however,
the order of the sections, especially in the use of theory and the literature, may vary from study to
study (see, e.g., Rudestam & Newton, 2014).
A Mixed Methods Proposal
In a mixed methods format, the researcher brings together the quantitative and qualitative research.
An example of such a format appears in Example 4.4 (adapted from Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018).
Similar elements are found in standards for publishing a mixed methods journal article being
advanced by the American Psychological Association (Levitt et al., 2018).
Example 4.4 A Mixed Methods Format
Introduction
The Research Problem (deficiencies in past research, the need for both quantitative and
qualitative data, and the insight from combining, or integrating, the two data sets)
The Purpose or Study Aim (the overall intent of collecting and combining quantitative and
qualitative data)
The Research Questions and Hypotheses (quantitative questions or hypotheses,
qualitative questions, mixed methods integration questions)
Philosophical Assumptions or Worldview and Theory
Literature Review (typically review quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods studies and
indicate the need for a mixed methods study)
Methods
A Definition of Mixed Methods Research and Rationale for Using It
The Type of Mixed Methods Design, Its Definition, and Example Studies Using It

--- Page 116 ---
A Diagram of the Design
Validity Challenges in the Design
Quantitative Data Collection (ordered to fit the mixed methods design)
Quantitative Data Analysis
Qualitative Data Collection
Qualitative Data Analysis
An Integration Statement
A Sample Joint Display Template
Anticipated Insights or Metainferences
Researcher’s Resources and Skills to Conduct Mixed Methods Research
Potential Ethical Issues
References
Appendixes: Instruments, Data Collection Protocols, Diagram of the Design, Timeline,
Budget, Summary of Major Content for Each Chapter
This format shows that the researcher poses research questions for quantitative, qualitative, and
mixed methods integration. Specify early in the proposal the reasons (rationale) for the mixed
methods approach and identify key elements of the process, such as the type of mixed methods
design, a visual diagram of the procedures, validity challenges in the design, and the quantitative and
qualitative data collection and analysis steps. This format could make the mixed methods proposal
lengthier than the qualitative or quantitative proposal.
Designing the Sections of a Proposal
Here are several research tips that we give to students about designing the overall structure of a
proposal:
Specify the sections early in the design of a proposal. Work on one section often prompts ideas
for other sections. First develop an outline, and then write something for each section rapidly to
get ideas down on paper. Then refine the sections as you consider the information that should
go into each one in more detail.
Find proposals that other students have authored under your adviser, and study them closely.
Ask your advisers for copies of proposals they especially liked and felt were scholarly products
to take to committees. Examine the topics addressed, their order, and the level of detail used in
composing the proposal.
Determine whether your program or institution offers a course on proposal development or
some similar topic. Often such a class will be helpful as a support network for your project to
have individuals react to your proposal ideas as they develop.
Sit with your adviser, and go over their preferred format for a proposal. Ask this adviser for a
copy of a proposal that might serve as a guide and whether there are published scientific
articles they recommend you study.

--- Page 117 ---
Consider the appropriate topics and the length of the proposal that will be acceptable to your
adviser and committee members. We prefer a proposal that does not exceed 30 pages, but the
length will differ by advisers, committees, and institutions. Some advisers and committee
members will expect the first three chapters of the dissertation (introduction, literature review,
and methods) as a proposal.
WRITING STRATEGIES
The Process
Early in the process of research, write ideas down rather than talk about them.
Bailey (1984) discusses how writing down ideas represents good thinking about a project. Zinsser
(1983) discusses the need to get words out of our heads and onto paper. Advisers react better
when they read the ideas on paper than when they hear and discuss a research topic with a student
or colleague. When a researcher renders ideas on paper, this process helps visualize the final
product, see how it looks, and begin to clarify ideas. The concept of working ideas out on paper has
served many experienced writers well. Before designing a proposal, draft a one- to two-page
overview of your project, and have your adviser approve the direction of your proposed study. This
draft might contain the essential information: the research problem, the purpose of the study, the
central questions, the sources of data, the project’s significance for different audiences, and how
you are thinking about the practical issues around completing the project (e.g., a budget, a project
timeline, anticipated problems, and how you will address them). It might also be useful to draft
several one- to two-page statements on different topics and see which one your adviser likes best
and feels would make the best contribution to your field.
Work through several drafts of a proposal rather than trying to polish the first
draft.
It is illuminating to see how people think on paper. Zinsser (1983) has identified two types of writers:
(a) the “bricklayer,” who makes every paragraph just right before going on to the next paragraph,
and (b) the “let-it-all-hang-out-on-the-first-draft” writer, who writes an entire first draft not caring
about sloppy or bad writing. In between these extremes comes a suggestion from Elbow (1973),
who recommends the iterative process of writing, reviewing, and rewriting. He has advised this
process: With only 1 hour to write a passage, write four drafts (one every 15 minutes) rather than
one draft (typically written in the last 15 minutes) during the hour. Most experienced researchers
write the first draft carefully but do not work for a polished draft; the polish comes relatively late in
the writing process.
Do not edit your proposal at the early-draft stage. Instead, consider Franklin’s (1986) three-stage
model, which we have found useful in developing proposals and in our scholarly writing:
1. First, develop an outline; it could be a sentence or word outline or a visual map.
2. Write out a draft and then shift and sort ideas, moving around entire paragraphs in the
manuscript.
3. Finally, edit and polish each sentence.
The Habit of Writing
Establish the discipline or habit of writing regularly and continuously. Write some sections of a
proposal or study, and then set them aside. A researcher gains perspective when returning to the
study after a short break. Further, a start-and-stop process of writing often disrupts the flow of
work. It may turn a well-meaning researcher into a “weekend writer.” This individual works on
research on weekends after finishing the other important work of the week. Continual work on the

--- Page 118 ---
g
proposal means writing something each day or at least being engaged daily in the processes of
thinking, collecting information, and reviewing.
Select a suitable time of day to work, and then discipline yourself to write at this time each day.
Choose a place free of distractions. We adapted Boice’s (1990, pp. 77–78) ideas about establishing
good writing habits:
Set a priority on writing, and make it a daily activity, regardless of mood or readiness to write.
If you feel you do not have time for regular writing, begin with reflection on daily activities for a
week or two in half-hour blocks. This reflection will likely lead to time to write.
Write while you are fresh during the day or night.
Avoid writing in binges.
Write in small, regular amounts.
Schedule writing tasks so that you plan to work on specific, manageable units of writing in each
session.
Keep daily charts. Graph at least three things: (a) time spent writing, (b) page equivalents
finished, and (c) percentage of planned task completed.
Plan beyond daily goals.
Share your writing with supportive, constructive friends until you feel ready to go public.
Consider also the writing implements and the physical location aiding the process of disciplined
writing. The implements—an online dictionary and a thesaurus, a tablet for jotting down thoughts, a
cup of coffee, and a handful of crackers (Wolcott, 2009). A favorite fountain pen offers the writer
options and comfortable ways to write. Consider adding a grammar-checking computer application
to assist in cleaning up the writing. The physical setting can also help. Annie Dillard (1989), the
Pulitzer Prize–winning novelist, avoided appealing workplaces:
One wants a room with no view, so imagination can meet memory in the dark. When I
furnished this study seven years ago, I pushed the long desk against a blank wall, so I
could not see from either window. Once, fifteen years ago, I wrote in a cinder-block cell
over a parking lot. It overlooked a tar-and-gravel roof. This pine shed under trees is not
quite so good as the cinder-block study was, but it will do. (pp. 26–27)
Clear and Concise Writing
Before beginning the writing, consider enhancing the readability of the manuscript. The Publication
Manual of the American Psychological Association (American Psychological Association, 2020)
discusses an orderly presentation by showing the relationships between ideas and the use of
transitional words. In addition, it is important to use consistent terms, a staging and foreshadowing
of ideas, and coherence built into the plan.
Use consistent terms throughout the proposal. In a quantitative study, use a consistent name for
mentioning variables. In qualitative research, state the same name for the central phenomena each
time. Refrain from using synonyms for these names, a problem that causes the reader to
misunderstand ideas and monitor subtle shifts in meaning. When terms shift, even slightly, it throws
the reader off and causes them to question the research.

--- Page 119 ---
Consider how narrative thoughts of different types guide a reader. Tarshis (1982) advanced the idea
that writers should have in mind the purpose of different-sized narrative thoughts and purposes for
segments of text. He said there were four types:
1. Umbrella thoughts: the general or core ideas one is trying to get across
2. Big thoughts in writing: specific ideas or images that fall within the realm of umbrella thoughts
and serve to reinforce, clarify, or elaborate upon the umbrella thoughts
3. Little thoughts: ideas or images whose chief function is to reinforce big thoughts
4. Attention or interest thoughts: ideas whose purposes are to keep the reader on track, organize
ideas, and keep an individual’s attention
Beginning researchers often struggle most with umbrella and attention thoughts. A proposal may
include too many umbrella ideas with content not sufficiently detailed to support large ideas. This
might occur in a literature review in which the researcher needs to provide fewer small sections and
more larger sections to tie together large bodies of literature. A clear mark of this problem is a
continual shift of ideas from one major topic to another in a manuscript. Often, one sees short,
unconnected paragraphs in introductions to proposals, like those written by journalists in newspaper
articles. Thinking in terms of a detailed narrative to support umbrella ideas may help this problem.
Attention thoughts that provide organizational statements to guide the reader are also needed.
Readers can use road signs to guide them from one major idea to the next (Chapters 6 and 7 of this
book discuss major road signs in research, such as purpose statements and research questions and
hypotheses). An organizing paragraph is often useful at the beginning and end of literature reviews.
Readers need to see the overall organization of the ideas through introductory paragraphs that
helps them understand the most salient points they should remember in a summary. The example of
a good proposal or application for federal funding comes to mind. In these applications, researchers
pause the narrative from time to time to provide attention thoughts that organize a reader to see
material to come next.
Coherence
Use coherence to add to the readability of the manuscript. Coherence in writing means that ideas
tie together, logically flow from one sentence to another, and connect from one paragraph to
another. For example, the repetition of the same variable names in the title, the purpose statement,
the research questions, and the review of the literature headings in a quantitative project add to
coherence. Likewise, emphasizing a consistent order for presenting independent and dependent
variables contributes to a coherent research proposal.
On a more detailed level, coherence builds through connecting sentences and paragraphs in the
manuscript. Zinsser (1983) has suggested that every sentence should be a logical sequel to the one
that preceded it. The hook-and-eye exercise (Wilkinson, 1991) is useful for connecting thoughts
from sentence to sentence and paragraph to paragraph. The researcher examines their writing,
circles key ideas in each sentence, and then connects the sentences (or paragraphs) with a line. A
good connection indicates coherence; a difficult connection shows a lack of coherence. Specific
words provide this linkage.
The passage in Figure 4.1 from a draft of a student’s proposal shows a high level of coherence. It
comes from the introductory section of a qualitative dissertation project about at-risk students. In
this passage, we draw hooks and eyes to connect the words from sentence to sentence and from
paragraph to paragraph. In this example, we were able to identify key ideas (“eyes”) and “hook” the
ideas within sentences and paragraphs. If we had found little coherence, the researcher would need
to add transitional words, phrases, or sentences to establish clear connections. This connection
pertains to connected chapters as well as sentences and paragraphs. Examine McPherson’s (1988)
book about the Civil War, The Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. He does a masterful job of
ending a chapter with ideas that naturally lead into the next chapter.

--- Page 120 ---
Description
Figure 4.1 An Illustration of the Hook and Eye Technique
It is important for a reader to find coherence in a proposal starting with the first page. In John’s
proposal development classes, he provided students with a coherence exercise on applying the
“hook and eye” activity. He first gave students a proposal introduction and asked them to analyze
the passage using the “hook and eye.” After they completed the activity, he then provided a marked-
up passage. He also pointed out where the manuscript needed transition words and phrases.
Voice, Tense, and “Fat”
From working with broad thoughts and paragraphs, we recommend moving to the level of writing
sentences and words. Similar grammar and sentence construction issues are addressed in the APA

--- Page 121 ---
Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020), but we include this section to
highlight some common grammar issues that we have seen in student proposals and in our writing.
We direct our discussion now toward the “polish” level of writing, to use Franklin’s (1986) term. It is
a stage addressed late in the writing process. One can find many writing books about research
writing and literary writing with rules and principles following good sentence construction and word
choice. Wolcott (2009), a qualitative ethnographer, for example, talks about honing editorial skills to
eliminate unnecessary words (keeping the essential words), deleting the passive voice (using the
active voice), and scaling down qualifiers (keeping only one qualifier at best). He also recommends
eliminating overused phrases (completely striking these out) and reducing excessive quotations,
italics, and parenthetical comments. The following additional ideas about active voice, verb tense,
and reduced fat can strengthen and invigorate scholarly writing for dissertation and thesis proposals
and projects.
Use the active voice as much as possible in scholarly writing (American Psychological
Association, 2020). According to the literary writer Ross-Larson (1982), “If the subject acts, the
voice is active. If the subject is acted on, the voice is passive” (p. 29). In addition, a sign of
passive construction is some variation of an auxiliary verb, such as was, will be, have been,
and is being. Writers can use passive construction when the person acting can logically be left
out of the sentence and when what is acted on is the subject of the rest of the paragraph
(Ross-Larson, 1982).
Use strong active verbs appropriate for the passage. Lazy verbs lack action, commonly called
“to be” verbs, such as is or was, or verbs turned into adjectives or adverbs.
Pay close attention to the tense of your verbs. A common practice exists in using the past tense
to review the literature and report results of past studies. The past tense represents a
commonly used form in quantitative research. The future tense appropriately indicates that the
study will be conducted in the future, a key verb used in proposals. Use the present tense to
add clarity to a study, especially in the introduction. This tense form frequently occurs in
qualitative studies. In mixed methods studies, researchers employ either the present or past
tense. The appropriate tense often reflects whether the major orientation of the study will be
quantitative or qualitative research (thus emphasizing one or the other in a study). The APA
Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020) recommends the past tense
(e.g., “Jones reported”) or the present perfect tense (e.g., “Researchers have reported”) for
the literature review and procedures based on past events, the past tense to describe results
(e.g., “stress lowered self-esteem”), and the present tense (e.g., “the qualitative findings
show”) to discuss the results and to present the conclusions. We see this not as a hard and
fast rule but as a useful guideline.
Expect to edit and revise drafts of a manuscript to trim the fat. Fat refers to additional words
that are unnecessary to convey the meaning of ideas and need to be removed. Writing multiple
drafts of a manuscript is standard practice for most writers. The process typically comprises
writing, reviewing, and editing. In the editing process, trim excess words from sentences, such
as piled-up modifiers, excessive prepositions, and “the-of” constructions—for example, “the
study of”—that add unnecessary verbiage (Ross-Larson, 1982). We were reminded of the
unnecessary prose that comes into writing by the example mentioned by Bunge (1985):
Nowadays you can almost see bright people struggling to reinvent the complex
sentence before your eyes. A friend of mine who is a college administrator every now
and then has to say a complex sentence, and he will get into one of those morasses
that begins, “I would hope that we would be able. . . .” He never talked that way when
I first met him, but even at his age, at his distance from the crisis in the lives of
younger people, he’s been to some extent alienated from easy speech. (p. 172)
Begin studying good writing about research using qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
designs. The eye does not pause and the mind does not stumble in good writing. The prose moves

--- Page 122 ---
along quickly.
We attempt in this book to draw examples of good research from health and social science journals,
such as Administrative Science Quarterly, American Educational Research Journal, American
Journal of Sociology, Journal of Applied Psychology, Journal of Mixed Methods Research, The
International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, Journal of Nursing Scholarship, Annals of
Family Medicine, and Sociology of Education. In the qualitative area, good literature serves to
illustrate clear prose and detailed passages. Individuals teaching qualitative research often assign to
students well-known books from literature, such as Moby Dick, The Scarlet Letter, and The Bonfire
of the Vanities, as reading assignments (Webb & Glesne, 1992). The Journal of Contemporary
Ethnography, Qualitative Family Research, Qualitative Health Research, Qualitative Inquiry, and
Qualitative Research represent good, scholarly journals in qualitative research. When using mixed
methods research, examine journals that report studies with combined qualitative and quantitative
research and data. Examine social science journals, such as the Journal of Mixed Methods
Research, The International Journal of Multiple Research Approaches, Field Methods, Quality and
Quantity, and the International Journal of Social Research Methodology. Examine numerous
articles cited in the SAGE Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioral Research
(Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2010) and in The Mixed Methods Reader (Plano Clark & Creswell, 2008).
ETHICAL ISSUES
In addition to conceptualizing the writing process for a proposal or study, researchers need to
anticipate the ethical issues and devise strategies for addressing them (Berg, 2001; Hesse-Biber &
Leavy, 2011; Punch, 2005; Sieber, 1998). Research involves collecting data from and about people
(Punch, 2014), leading to difficult ethical issues. Writing about these ethical issues is a cornerstone
of good research writing. As shown in Table 4.1, attention needs to be directed toward ethical
issues prior to or before conducting the study, beginning a study, during data collection and data
analysis, and in reporting, disseminating, and storing the data. Ethical issues arise in qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods research and all stages of research.
Table 4.1 Ethical Issues in Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods Research

--- Page 123 ---
Process of
Research
Where the Type of Ethical Issue How to Address the Issue
Ethical Issue
Occurs

--- Page 124 ---
Process of
Research
Where the Type of Ethical Issue How to Address the Issue
Ethical Issue
Occurs
Prior to
conducting the Examine professional Consult the code of ethics for
study association standards. professional associations in your field or
discipline.
Seek college/university
institutional review board Submit a proposal for IRB approval.
(IRB) approval.
Identify and seek local approvals; find
Gain local permission from gatekeepers or key personnel to help.
site and participants.
Select a site where the researcher can
Select a site for the study. be objective and not have a personal
interest.
Negotiate authorship for
publication. Decide on author order for publication
based on each author’s contribution.
Plan to keep the burden of
research for participants to Use brief instruments, pilot-test user
a minimum. acceptability of data collection, collect
data at convenient times, and provide
compensation for participants’ time.
Beginning the
study Identify a research Determine the needs of participants
problem that will benefit through a needs assessment or informal
participants. conversations.
Disclose purpose of the Contact participants and inform them of
study. the general purpose of the study.
Do not pressure Tell participants that they have a right
participants into signing not to sign the consent form.
consent forms.
Contact indigenous leaders, and involve
Respect norms and them in all phases of research.
charters of indigenous
societies. Obtain appropriate consent for
vulnerable populations (e.g., parents as
Be sensitive to vulnerable well as children).
populations’ needs (e.g.,
children).

--- Page 125 ---
Process of
Research
Where the Type of Ethical Issue How to Address the Issue
Ethical Issue
Occurs
Collecting data
Respect the site, and Build trust, and discuss extent of
disrupt as little as possible. anticipated disruption in gaining access
with participants.
Make certain that all
participants receive the Put into place wait-list provisions for
same treatment. treatment for participants in the control
group.
Recruit participants by
collaborating with Recruit to support the representation of
stakeholders and special populations and access to
community partners. diverse national networks.
Avoid deceiving Discuss purpose of the study and the
participants. use of the data.
Respect potential power Avoid leading questions, withhold
imbalances and exploitation personal opinions, do not disclose
of participants (e.g., sensitive information, and involve
through interviewing, participants as collaborators.
observing).
Provide rewards for participating.
Do not “use” participants
by gathering data and Stick to questions stated in an interview
leaving site. protocol.
Avoid collecting information
harmful to participants.
Analyzing data
Avoid siding with Report multiple perspectives.
participants.
Report contrary findings.
Avoid disclosing only
positive results. Assign fictitious names or aliases, and
develop composite profiles of
Respect the privacy and participants.
anonymity of participants.

--- Page 126 ---
Process of
Research
Where the Type of Ethical Issue How to Address the Issue
Ethical Issue
Occurs
Reporting,
sharing, and Avoid falsifying authorship, Report honestly.
storing data evidence, data, findings,
and conclusions. See American Psychological
Association (2020) guidelines for
Do not plagiarize. permissions needed to reprint or adapt
work of others.
Avoid disclosing
information that would Use composite stories to protect the
harm participants. identity of participants.
Communicate in clear, Use biased-free language, and refrain
straightforward, from discriminatory language.
appropriate language.
Provide copies of reports to participants
Share data with others. and stakeholders, and consider website
distribution.
Keep raw data and other
materials (e.g., details of Keep and store materials for five years.
procedures, instruments).
Refrain from using the same material
Do not duplicate or for more than one publication.
piecemeal publications.
Disclose funders for research and those
Provide complete proof of who profit from the research.
compliance with ethical
issues and lack of conflict Give credit for ownership to
of interest, if requested. researchers, participants, and advisers.
State who owns the data
from a study.
Sources: Adapted from APA (2020); Creswell and Poth (2018); Lincoln (2009); Mertens and Ginsberg (2009); and Salmons (2010).
Prior to Beginning the Study
Examine Codes of Ethics.
Consult early in the development of your proposal the code of ethics for your professional
association. In the literature, ethical issues arise in discussions about codes of professional conduct
for researchers and in commentaries about ethical dilemmas and their potential solutions (Punch,
2014). Many national professional associations publish standards or codes of ethics on their
websites. For example, see the following websites:
The American Psychological Association Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct, current version, 2017 (www.apa.org)

--- Page 127 ---
The American Sociological Association Code of Ethics, current version, 2008 (www.asanet.org)
The American Anthropological Association’s Code of Ethics, current version, 2012
(ethics.americananthro.org)
The American Educational Research Association Ethical Standards of the American Educational
Research Association, current version 2011 (www.aera.net)
The American Nurses Association Nursing Code of Ethics, current version, 2015
(www.nurse.org)
The American Medical Association Code of Ethics, current version, 2016 (www.ama-assn.org)
Apply to the Institutional Review Board.
Researchers need to have their research plans reviewed by an institutional review board (IRB) on
their college and university campuses. IRB committees exist on campuses because of federal
regulations that protect against human rights violations. Approval is needed by the IRB before data
collection occurs. The IRB committee requires the researcher to assess participant potential risk,
such as physical, psychological, social, economic, or legal harm (Sieber, 1998). Also, the
researcher needs to consider the special needs of vulnerable populations, such as minors (under the
age of 19), mentally incompetent participants, victims, persons with neurological impairments,
pregnant women or fetuses, prisoners, and individuals with AIDS. Before the study begins
researchers file an application with the IRB that contains procedures and information about
participants. The committee reviews the extent to which participants are at risk in the study. In
addition to this application, researchers need to have participants sign informed consent forms
agreeing to the provisions of the study before they provide data. This form contains a standard set
of elements that acknowledges protection of human rights. They include the following (Sarantakos,
2005):
Identification of the researcher
Identification of the sponsoring institution
Identification of the purpose of the study
Identification of the benefits for participating
Identification of the level and type of participants’ involvement
Statements of potential risks to participants
Guarantees of confidentiality to the participants
Assurance that participants can withdraw at any time
Names of persons to contact if questions arise
Obtain Necessary Permissions.
Prior to the study, researchers need to obtain approval of individuals in authority (e.g., gatekeepers)
to access sites and study participants. This approval often involves writing a letter specifying the
extent of time, potential impact, and research outcomes. Use of internet responses through
electronic interviews or surveys also needs permission from participants. First obtain permission and
then send out the interview or survey via the internet.

--- Page 128 ---
Select a Site With No Vested Interests.
Select a site to study where you do not have an interest in outcomes. It does not allow for
quantitative objectivity or full expression of qualitative multiple perspectives. Select sites that will not
raise these questions of power and influence in your study.
Negotiate Authorship for Publication.
If planning to publish your study (e.g., a dissertation project), negotiate authorship order and
involvement before beginning the study. Order of authorship typically follows individuals’ contributions
to the study. Israel and Hay (2006) have discussed the unethical practice of “gift authorship” where
individuals receive authorship who do not contribute to a manuscript. They also discuss “ghost
authorship,” where researchers omit junior staff who made significant contributions from the list of
authors. The inclusion of authors and the order of authorship may change during a study, but a
preliminary understanding early in the project helps address this issue before publication.
Beginning the Study
Identify a Beneficial Problem.
When studying a research problem, identify a problem beneficial to participants and one meaningful
to others besides the researcher (Punch, 2014). Hesse-Biber and Leavy (2011) raise awareness of
this issue when they ask, “How do ethical issues enter into your selection of a research problem?”
(p. 86). To identify the best problem to study, proposal developers often conduct pilot projects or a
needs assessment or hold informal conversations with participants. Such strategies help detect any
potential marginalization of participants through the research before the study begins.
Disclose the Purpose of the Study.
In developing the purpose statement or the central intent and questions for a study, proposal
developers need to describe the purpose of the study to participants (Sarantakos, 2005). Deception
occurs when participants understand one purpose, but the researcher holds a different purpose.
Another disclosure is the specification of the study’s sponsors. Such disclosure can occur by
designing cover letters inviting participants to a study with sponsors’ names attached.
Do Not Pressure Participants to Sign Consent Forms.
The researcher should not require participants to sign the informed consent form when collecting
consent for a study. Participation in a study is voluntary, and this needs explanation in the informed
consent form instructions.
Respect Norms and Charters of Indigenous Cultures.
The researcher needs to anticipate and respect cultural, religious, gender, or other differences in the
participants and sites. Recent discussions about the norms and charters of indigenous populations,
such as Native American tribes, need to be observed (LaFrance & Crazy Bull, 2009). As Native
Americans take over the delivery of services to members, they have reclaimed their right to approve
research and its report in a sensitive way to tribal culture and charters. Respect also occurs through
research approaches such as refraining from using the language of the dominant culture (instead of
indigenous gestures, tone, expressions) and emphasizing cultural conversational methods (e.g.,
talking circles, storytelling). It also occurs through seeking out wise “knowers” of the language,

--- Page 129 ---
practices, and rituals and including participants as co-researchers. Researchers should be
accountable and respectful, reciprocate for visiting the people and sites, and observe indigenous
rights and regulations of participants (Chilisa & Tsheko, 2014).
Assess the Burden of the Research on Participants.
Another respectful strategy is to respect the potential burden the research places on participants.
All forms of research place a burden on participants, but often an undue burden occurs when the
researcher collects multiple forms of data. In mixed methods, strategies need to be planned to use
short and brief instruments to collect data, pilot-test user acceptability of data collection, provide
compensation for participants’ time, and gather data at convenient times for participants (Stadnick
et al., 2021).
Collecting the Data
Respect the Site, and Disrupt as Little as Possible.
Researchers need to respect research sites and leave them undisturbed after a study. This requires
that inquirers, especially in qualitative studies involving prolonged observation or interviewing at a
site, be aware of their impact and minimize their disruption of the physical setting. For example, they
might time visits to not disrupt the flow of participant activities. Also, consult organizational guidelines
that provide advice conducting research without disturbing settings.
Make Sure That All Participants Receive the Benefits.
In experimental studies, investigators can collect data so that all participants benefit from the
treatments, not only an experimental group. This requires providing some treatment to all groups or
staging the treatment so that ultimately all groups receive the beneficial treatment (e.g., a wait-list).
Further, both the researcher and the participants should benefit from the research.
Collaborate With Participants.
In some situations, the abuse of power occurs when researchers coerce participants to be involved
in projects. Involving individuals collaboratively in the research provides reciprocity. Collaboration
with groups and populations and using networks helps recruiting diverse and special populations
(Stadnick et al., 2021). Collaboration in qualitative research means involving participants throughout
the research process, such as in design, data collection and analysis, report writing, and
dissemination of the findings (Patton, 2002).
Avoid Deceptive Practices.
Participants need to know that they are actively participating in a research study. To counteract this
problem, provide instructions that remind the participants about the purpose before the study
begins.
Respect Potential Power Imbalances.
Interviews (and observations) should begin from the premise that a power imbalance exists between
the data collector and the participants.

--- Page 130 ---
Interviewers should consider how the interview will improve participants’ lives, cause less potential
stress for the participants, and provide a voice for participants. Further, readers might critically
question interviewees’ comments, leading to difficult consequences for those interviewed.
Avoid Exploitation of Participants.
Researchers need to consider how they will give back to participants. Reciprocity can be offered by
providing a small reward for participation, sharing the final research report, and involving participants
as collaborators. Some researchers have taken advantage of participants by gathering data and
abruptly leaving the research site. This results in participant exploitation. Rewards and appreciation
provide respect and reciprocity for those who provide valuable data.
Avoid Collecting Harmful Information.
The possibility of gathering harmful, intimate information during data collection and disclosing it later
presents a problem. A researcher’s challenge is anticipating and planning the impact of information
during or after an interview (Patton, 2002). For example, a student may discuss parental abuse, or
prisoners may talk about an escape. Typically, in these situations, the ethical code for researchers
(which may be different for schools and prisons) protects the privacy of the participants and
individuals involved in a study.
Analyzing the Data
Avoid Taking Sides.
It is easy for researchers to support and embrace the perspectives of participants in a study. In
qualitative studies, this means “taking sides” and reporting only results that place the participants in
a favorable light. In quantitative research, it means disregarding data that proves or disproves
personal hypotheses held by the researcher.
Avoid Disclosing Only Positive Results.
In research, it is academically dishonest to withhold important results or to cast the results in a
favorable light for participants or readers. In qualitative research, the inquirer needs to report the full
range of findings, including results contrary to the themes. A good qualitative study includes the
diversity of participant perspectives. In quantitative research, the data analysis should reflect the
statistical tests and not be underreported.
Respect the Privacy of Participants.
In analyzing the data and reporting results, protect the anonymity of individuals, roles, and incidents.
For example, in survey research, investigators disassociate names from responses during the
coding and recording process. In qualitative research, inquirers use aliases or pseudonyms for
individuals and places.
Reporting, Sharing, and Storing Data
Provide an Accurate Account of Information.

--- Page 131 ---
In interpreting data, researchers should provide an accurate account of the information. This
accuracy may involve debriefing between the researcher and participants in quantitative research
(Berg, 2001). In qualitative research, validity strategies (see Chapter 9) help the accuracy of an
account. Other ethical issues in reporting research involve the potential of suppressing, falsifying, or
inventing findings to meet a researcher’s or an audience’s needs. Professional research
communities find these fraudulent practices unacceptable. They constitute scientific misconduct
(Neuman, 2009).
Do Not Plagiarize.
Copying extensive material from others is an ethical problem. Researchers should give credit for the
work of others. Use quotation marks and page numbers to set off the exact words of others. The
key idea is to not present the work of another as your own (American Psychological Association,
2020). A paraphrase of sentences from others deserves a citation. Journals typically have
guidelines for seeking permissions from publishers for information borrowed.
Avoid Disclosing Harmful Information.
One issue to anticipate about confidentiality is that some participants may not want to disclose their
identity. By honoring this need, the researcher allows the participants to retain ownership of their
voices and exert their independent decision-making. Participants should be informed about the risks
of non-confidentiality, such as the inclusion of data in the final report. Participants may not
appreciate disclosing information they wanted concealed (Giordano et al., 2007). In planning a
study, anticipate the repercussions of conducting the research on participants and privileging the
results of one group or another.
Communicate in Clear Language.
Report in the results bias-free and non-discriminatory language. Clear guidelines are available in the
Publication Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020). We briefly introduced in the
discussion about abstracting the literature in Chapter 2. For example, when reporting the results
about age, indicate exact ages or age ranges. When reporting on disabilities, mention specific
names of conditions (e.g., people with intellectual disabilities). In writing about gender, include
descriptors with modifiers rather than general categories (e.g., disenfranchised women rather than
women). For racial or ethnic groups, use specific regions of origin rather than generalized origin
(e.g., Japanese Americans rather than Asian Americans). When reporting about sexual orientation,
mention the specific names of orientation rather than broad groups (e.g., gay men rather than
homosexuals). When writing about socioeconomic status, indicate specific designations rather than
general labels (e.g., below the federal level of poverty for a family of six rather than low income).
Share Data With Others.
Release the details of the research with the study design so that readers can determine the
credibility of the study (Neuman, 2009). Strategies for sharing include engaging with stakeholders in
the dissemination process, revisiting authorship agreements, providing copies of reports to
participants and stakeholders, making distributions of reports available on websites, and publishing
studies in multiple languages (see Stadnick et al., 2021).
Keep Raw Data and Other Materials.
Data, once analyzed, needs to be kept for a reasonable period. Sieber (1998) recommends 5 to 10
years; most guidelines recommend 5 years. For example, this material comprises details of

--- Page 132 ---
procedures, instruments, and raw data. After this period, investigators discard the data so that it
does not fall into the hands of other researchers who might misuse it.
Do Not Duplicate or Piecemeal Publications.
Researchers should not publish papers with duplicate or redundant information from a study. This
duplication comprises presenting the same data, discussions, and conclusions without offering new
material. Some biomedical journals now require authors to declare whether they have published or
are preparing to publish papers closely related to the manuscript submitted (Israel & Hay, 2006).
Complete Proof of Compliance and Lack of Conflict of Interest.
Some academic campuses require authors to file statements indicating that they do not have a
conflict of interest in publishing the research. Such conflict might arise from research payments,
vested interests in the outcome of the data, or the misappropriation of research for personal use.
Comply with requests for disclosure about potential conflicts of interests that surround your
research.
Understand Who Owns the Data.
Ownership of the data, once it is collected and analyzed, represents another ethical issue. The
ownership question can split research teams and divide individuals against each other. A research
proposal might mention this issue of ownership and discuss how it will be resolved, such as
developing a clear understanding among the researcher, the participants, and the faculty advisers
(Punch, 2014). Berg (2001) has recommended using personal agreements to designate ownership
of research data.
Summary
Plan the topics to be included in a proposal or research project. Consider addressing the
nine arguments advanced by Maxwell (2013), and then structure the plan using the
qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods formats suggested in this chapter. Good writing
strategies include thinking through ideas by putting them down on paper and establishing the
habit of routine writing. Be consistent in linking the sentences, paragraphs, and chapters in a
research study. A good narrative structure is to write using umbrella thoughts, big thoughts,
little thoughts, and especially attention or interest thoughts to keep the reader on track. Also
use the active voice, use strong verbs, and revise and edit to strengthen your prose.
Throughout the entire writing process and engaging in research, anticipate and address
potential ethical issues. These issues may occur prior to conducting a study, when beginning
the study, when collecting and analyzing the data, and in reporting and sharing the results.
KEY TERMS
Code of ethics 95
Coherence in writing 88
Fat 91
Habit of writing 85

--- Page 133 ---
Hook-and-eye exercise 88
Informed consent forms 96
Institutional review board (IRB) 96
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Develop a topical outline for a quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods proposal.
Include the major topics for an outline introduced in this chapter.
2. Practice the “hook and eye” exercise to identify consistency in writing. Locate a journal
article that reports qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods research. Examine the
introduction to the article, and apply the hook-and-eye method. Identify the flow of ideas
from sentence to sentence and from paragraph to paragraph.
3. Consider one of the following ethical dilemmas that may face a researcher. Describe
ways you might anticipate the problems, and employ strategies to address them.
a. A prisoner you are interviewing tells you about a potential breakout at the prison
that night. What do you do?
b. A researcher on your team copies sentences from another study and incorporates
them into the final written report for your project. What do you do?
c. A student collects data for a project from several individuals interviewed in families
in your city. After the fourth interview, the student tells you that approval has not
been received for the project from the IRB. What will you do?
Additional Readings
American Psychological Association. (2020). Publication manual of the American
Psychological Association (7th ed.). Author.
This style manual is an essential tool for a researcher. It contains discussions about ethical
issues and standards in publishing. Further, it covers writing clearly and concisely,
addressing such topics as continuity, tone, precision, clarity, and strategies to improve
writing style. It gives ample illustrations about how to reduce bias in a scholarly research
report. Specific sections address the mechanics of style, such as punctuation, spelling,
capitalization, and abbreviations.
Israel, M., & Hay, I. (2006). Research ethics for social scientists: Between ethical conduct
and regulatory compliance. SAGE.
Case studies provide useful scenarios for thinking about and anticipating ethical issues. Mark
Israel and Iain Hay critically analyze the practical value of thinking seriously and
systematically about what constitutes ethical conduct in the social sciences. They review the
different theories of ethics, such as the consequentialist and the non-consequentialist
approaches, virtue ethics, and normative and case-oriented approaches to ethical conduct.
They also offer an international perspective, drawing on the history of ethical practices in
countries worldwide. They offer practical case examples and ways researchers might treat
the cases ethically. In the appendix, they provide three case examples and then call upon
leading scholars to comment about how they would approach the ethical issues.
Maxwell, J. (2013). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (3rd ed.). SAGE.
We feel that Joe Maxwell’s nine steps of topics for a proposal provide a useful guide for
designing a rigorous plan. Maxwell offers a good overview of the proposal development

--- Page 134 ---
process for qualitative research that is applicable in many ways to quantitative and mixed
methods research. He states that a proposal is an argument for conducting a study and
presents an example that describes nine necessary steps. Moreover, he includes a complete
qualitative proposal and analyzes to illustrate a good model.
Sieber, J. E. (1998). Planning ethically responsible research. In L. Bickman & D. J. Rog
(Eds.), Handbook of applied social research methods (pp. 127–156). SAGE.
It is not enough to identify types of ethical issues. Equally important are the strategies used
to address a study’s problem. Joan Sieber discusses the importance of ethical planning as
integral to the process of research design. In this chapter she provides a comprehensive
review of many topics related to ethical issues, such as IRBs, informed consent, privacy,
confidentiality, anonymity, elements of research risk, and studying vulnerable populations.
Her coverage is extensive, and her recommendations for strategies are numerous.
Stadnick, N. A., Poth, C. N., Guetterman, T. C., & Gallo, J. J. (2021). Advancing discussion
of ethics in mixed methods health services research. Health Services Research.
https://www.doi.org/10.1186/s12913-021-06583-1.
Little guidance exists in the mixed methods literature to help researchers identify and enact
strategies to address ethical issues. An exception would be the article by Nicole Stadnick
and colleagues. They advance a discussion of ethics building on results to a survey of
scholars, faculty, and consultants participating in the National Institutes of Health-funded
Mixed Methods Research Training Program in the Health Sciences. The survey respondents
provided information about ethical issues and strategies specific to mixed methods research.
Mixed methods strategies addressed participant burden, equitable recruitment practices,
communication, and dissemination of findings. Within these broad categories, participants
shared specific strategies they used to address the ethical issues.
Wolcott, H. F. (2009). Writing up qualitative research (3rd ed.). SAGE.
A guide to scholarly, concise prose would not be complete without studying carefully the
work of a master writer. Harry Wolcott, a distinguished educational ethnographer, has
compiled an excellent resource guide addressing numerous aspects of the writing process in
qualitative research. He discusses techniques useful in getting started in writing; developing
details; linking with the literature, theory, and method; tightening up with revising and editing;
and finishing the process by attending to aspects such as the title and appendixes. For
aspiring writers, this is an essential book, regardless of whether a study is qualitative,
quantitative, or mixed methods.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The text consists of circled words and phrases. Arrows connect a circled word or phrase with the
subsequent circled word or phrase. Text reads, They, They is circled, sit in the back of the room not
because they want to but because it was the place designated to them. Invisible barriers that exist
in most classrooms divide the room and separate the students, students is circled. At the front of
the room are the good students, students is circled, who wait with their hands poised ready to fly
into the air at a moment’s notice. Slouched down like giant insects caught in educational traps, the
athletes, athletes is circled, and their following occupy the center of the room. Those, Those is
circled, less sure of themselves and their position within the room sit in the back and around the
edge of the student body.
A new paragraph begins. Text reads, The students, students is circled, seated in the outer circle
make up a population whom for a variety of reasons are not succeeding in the American public
education system. They, They is circled, have always been part of the student population. In the
past they, they is circled, have been called disadvantaged, low achieving, retards, impoverished,
laggards and a variety of other titles, Cuban, 1989; Presseisen, 1988. Today they are called

--- Page 135 ---
students-at-risk, students-at-risk circled. Their faces are changing and in urban settings their
numbers are growing, Hodgkinson, 1985.
A new paragraph begins. Text reads, In the past eight years there has been an unprecedented
amount of research on the need for excellence in education and the at-risk student, at-risk student
circled. In 1983 the government released a document entitled A Nation At-Risk that identified
problems, problems is circled, within the American education system and called for major reform.
Much of the early reform, early reform is circled, focused on more vigorous courses of study and
higher standards of student achievement, Barber, 1987. In the midst of attention to excellence, it
became apparent the needs of the marginal student, the needs of the marginal student is circled,
were not being met. The question of what it would take to guarantee that all students, students is
circled, have a fair chance at a quality education was receiving little attention, Hamilton, 1987; Toch,
1984. As the push for excellence in education increased, the needs of the at-risk student, at-risk
student is circled, became more apparent.
The text consists of circled words and phrases. Arrows connect a circled word or phrase with the
subsequent circled word or phrase. Text reads, Much of the early research focused on identifying
characteristics of the at-risk student, at-risk student is circled, O E R I, 1987; Barber and McClellan,
1987; Hahn, 1987; Rumberger, 1987, while others in educational research called for reform and
developed programs for at-risk students, at-risk students is circled, Mann, 1987; Presseisen, 1988;
Whelage, 1988; Whelege and Lipman, 1988; Stocklinski, 1991; and Levin, 1991. Studies and
research on this topic, topic is circled, have included experts within the field of education, business
and industry as well as many government agencies. Although progress has been made in identifying
characteristics of the at-risk students and in developing programs to meet their needs, the essence
of the at-risk issue, at-risk issue circled, continues to plague the American school system. Some
educators feel that we do not need further research, research is circled, DeBlois, 1989; Hahn, 1987.
Others, Others is circled, call for a stronger network between business and education, DeBlois,
1989; Mann, 1987; Whelege, 1988. Still others, Still others is circled, call for total restructuring of
our education system, O E R I, 1987; Gainer, 1987; Levin, 1988; McCune, 1988. After all the
research and studies by, research and studies by is circled, the experts, we still have students
hanging on to the fringe of education. The uniqueness of this study will shift the, shift the is circled,
focus from causes and curriculum to the student. It is time to question the students, students is
circled, and to listen to their responses. This added dimension should bring further understanding to
research already available and, available and is circled, lead to further areas of reform. Dropouts
and potential dropouts will be interviewed in depth to discover if there, discover if there is circled,
are common factors within the public school setting that interfere with their learning process. This
information should be helpful to both the researcher who, researcher who is circled, will continue to
look for new approaches in education and the practitioner who works with these students every day.

--- Page 136 ---
PART II DESIGNING RESEARCH
Chapter 5 The Introduction
Chapter 6 The Purpose Statement
Chapter 7 Research Questions and Hypotheses
Chapter 8 Quantitative Methods
Chapter 9 Qualitative Methods
Chapter 10 Mixed Methods Procedures
This section addresses the use of quantitative, qualitative, and mixed
methods research in conducting the steps in the research process.
Each chapter introduces a separate step in this process, beginning
with introducing a study.

--- Page 137 ---
CHAPTER 5 THE INTRODUCTION
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Construct a good abstract for a study with five key components.
2. Describe reasons for an introduction’s role as a key feature of a study.
3. Compare an introduction for a qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods study.
4. Describe the four components of a good introduction to a study.
INTRODUCTION TO A STUDY
We have discussed how to choose a qualitative, quantitative, or mixed methods approach; conduct a
preliminary literature review; and structure the format for a research project. After these preliminary
steps, it is important to plan the study and write the plan’s sections. We start by designing an
introduction. This chapter begins by discussing the importance of a good introduction. Then we compare
the differences in writing an introduction for qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies. Central
to writing a good introduction is the structure for organizing it. We present a template for an introduction,
called a deficiencies model for an introduction. This model contains four parts, stating: (a) the
research problem, (b) evidence from the literature justifying the problem, (c) deficiencies in the evidence,
and (d) the importance of the problem for audiences. We call this model a deficiency model because a
major component of the introduction establishes the deficiencies in past research. To illustrate this model,
we present an example of a study that uses this template.
THE IMPORTANCE OF INTRODUCTIONS
An introduction is the first passage in a journal article, dissertation, or scholarly research study. It sets the
stage for the entire project. Wilkinson (1991) said the following:
The introduction is the part of the paper that provides readers with the background information
for the research reported in the paper. Its purpose is to establish a framework for the research,
so that readers can understand how it is related to other research. (p. 96)
The introduction establishes the issue or concern leading to the research by conveying information about
a problem. Because it is the initial passage in a study or proposal, it requires special attention. It must
create reader interest in the topic, establish the problem that leads to the study, place the study within
the larger context of the scholarly literature, and reach out to audiences. These sections need to fit into a
concise section of a few pages.
A research problem is the problem or issue that leads to the need for a study. It can originate from many
potential sources. It might spring from researchers’ experiences in their personal lives or workplaces or
come from debates in the literature. These debates often illustrate a gap in the literature, seek to resolve
alternative perspectives, or extend the discussion. Further, the research problem sometimes develops
from policy debates in government or among top executives.
Regardless of the source, researchers often state multiple research problems leading to a study.
Stating a clear problem is challenging. First, too often researchers identify what exists in the literature
rather than identifying a problem that requires a solution. For example, a researcher could cite the
importance of teenage pregnancy by conveying its prevalence. This statement is not a problem. Rather, a
problem might be that schools have done a poor job of accommodating pregnant teenagers. We
recommend not simply stating the facts about a situation but thinking deeply about the underlying problem
that exists.

--- Page 138 ---
Second, when authors do not clearly identify the research problem, readers must decide for themselves
the importance of the study. If a study starts poorly without a clear problem, the reader may wonder why
it is important to examine and cease to read the study to its conclusion. Third, the research problem
differs from the research questions. The research problem is a problem or issue, whereas research
questions raise questions to be answered by gathering and analyzing data. Fourth, introductions carry the
weight of encouraging the reader to read further.
Fortunately, there is a model for writing a good, scholarly introduction. Before introducing this model, it is
necessary to briefly discuss the composition of a good abstract that precedes an introduction and then to
distinguish subtle differences between introductions for qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
studies.
AN ABSTRACT FOR A STUDY
An abstract summarizes the contents of a study and allows readers to identify the essential elements of a
project quickly. It is placed at the beginning of studies, and we find abstracts in study proposals, theses,
and dissertations. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (American
Psychological Association, 2020) states that the abstract can be the most important single paragraph in a
study. It needs to be accurate, non-evaluative (by not adding comments beyond the scope of the
research), coherent, readable, and concise. Its length varies, and some colleges and universities have
requirements for an appropriate length.
The APA Publication Manual guidelines say that most abstracts are about 250 words. The Publication
Manual also includes standards for content for abstracts in different paper types. These paper types are
empirical, replication, quantitative or qualitative meta-analyses, literature review, theoretical, and
methodological articles. We will focus here on the abstract for a proposal for an empirical (data-based)
article. We see several major components as part of the abstract, and these would be the same whether
the proposal is quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods. Also, we would present these components in
the order that follows:
1. Start with the issue or problem under investigation. This issue might need more literature or a real-
life problem (e.g., reaction to vaccines). Cite a reference or two about this problem, but the abstract
is too short to include many references.
2. Indicate data sources and pertinent characteristics.
3. State the essential features of the study method (i.e., design, analysis, data gathering, sample size,
materials, and whether the methods involve secondary analysis).
4. Convey the basic findings. For quantitative analysis, include effect sizes, confidence intervals, and
statistical significance levels. For qualitative methods, indicate main findings and contexts.
5. Finish with conclusions and implications or applications of the research findings.
This example illustrates the essential components in an abstract for an empirical (data-based) study. We
would add to this list a purpose statement following the problem statement.
Here is an example of a short abstract for a qualitative study that contains all five elements.
The issue that this study addresses is the lack of women in martial arts competitions. To
address this problem, the purpose of this study will be exploring motivation of female athletes in
Tae Kwon Do competitions. To gather data, interviews with 4 female Tae Kwon Do tournament
competitors were conducted. The interviews were transcribed and analyzed. This data leads to
the following 3 themes: social support, self-efficacy, and goal orientation. These themes will be
useful for understanding the optimal way to increase motivation in female martial artists. (Witte,
2011, personal communication)
QUALITATIVE, QUANTITATIVE, AND MIXED METHODS
INTRODUCTIONS
A general review of introductions shows that they follow a similar pattern: the author announces a
problem and justifies why it needs to be studied. The type of problem presented in an introduction will

--- Page 139 ---
vary depending on the approach (see Chapter 1).
Quantitative introductions typically present a set structure. In a quantitative project, problems often arise
from a need to understand what factors or variables influence an outcome. For example, in response to
worker cutbacks (a problem for all employees), an investigator may seek to discover what factors
influence businesses to downsize. Another researcher may seek to understand the high divorce rate
among married couples (a problem) and examine whether financial issues contribute to divorce. In both
situations, the research problem is one in which understanding the factors that explain or relate to an
outcome helps the investigator best understand and explain the problem. In addition, in quantitative
introductions, researchers seek to improve and test a theory. As such, an established theory is
described, and then literature is described that challenges or extends the theory. A quantitative
introduction may be written from an impersonal point of view and use sentences posed in the past tense
to convey objectivity.
A qualitative introduction presents a varied structure. In a qualitative project the author will describe a
research problem that can best be understood by exploring a concept or phenomenon.
We have suggested that qualitative research is exploratory, and researchers use it to probe a topic when
the variables, questions, and theory are unknown. For example, Morse (1991) said:
Characteristics of a qualitative research problem are: (a) the concept is “immature” due to a
conspicuous lack of theory and previous research; (b) a notion that the available theory may be
inaccurate, inappropriate, incorrect, or biased; (c) a need exists to explore and describe the
phenomena and to develop theory; or (d) the nature of the phenomenon may not be suited to
quantitative measures. (p. 120)
For example, urban sprawl (a problem) needs exploration because it has not been examined in certain
areas of a state. Also, kids in elementary classrooms have anxiety that interferes with learning (a
problem), and the best way to explore this problem is to go to schools and visit directly with teachers and
students. Some qualitative researchers use a transformative lens to examine the problem (e.g., the
inequality of pay among women and men or the racial attitudes involved in profiling drivers on the
highways). Thomas (1993) suggested that “critical researchers begin from the premise that all cultural life
is in constant tension between control and resistance” (p. 9). This theoretical orientation shapes the
structure of an introduction. In some qualitative studies, the approach in the introduction may be more
deductive while relying on participants’ perspectives. In addition, qualitative introductions may begin with a
personal statement of experiences from the author, such as those found in phenomenological studies
(Moustakas, 1994). They may also be written from a personal, first person, subjective point of view in
which researchers position themselves in the narrative.
A mixed methods study introduction can employ either the qualitative or the quantitative approach (or
some combination) to writing an introduction. In a mixed methods study, the emphasis might tip toward
either quantitative or qualitative research, and the introduction will mirror that emphasis. For other mixed
methods projects, the emphasis will be equal between qualitative and quantitative research. In this case,
the problem may be one in which a need exists to understand the relationship among variables in a
situation quantitatively and to explore the topic in further depth qualitatively. A mixed methods problem
may indicate that the existing research is primarily quantitative or qualitative, and a need exists to expand
the approach to be more inclusive of diverse methodologies. As an example, a mixed methods project
may initially seek to explain the relationship between smoking behavior and depression among
adolescents, then explore the detailed views of these youth, and display different patterns of smoking
and depression. With the first quantitative project phase, the introduction may emphasize a quantitative
approach with a theory that predicts this relationship and a substantive review of the literature.
A MODEL FOR AN INTRODUCTION
These differences among approaches are subtle, and they relate largely to the different types of
problems addressed in qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods studies. Regardless of approach, a
template for writing an introduction can be useful.
The deficiencies model of an introduction is an approach to writing an introduction to a research study
that builds on gaps in the literature. It includes the elements of stating the research problem, reviewing

--- Page 140 ---
past studies about the problem, indicating deficiencies in these studies, and advancing the significance of
the study. It is a general template for writing a good introduction. Our review of research studies shows it
to be a popular structure, especially in the social sciences. It appears repeatedly in many published
research studies (not always in the order presented here). It comprises four parts, and writers can
allocate one paragraph to each part with an introduction totaling about two pages in length.
1. State the research problem.
2. Review evidence from literature justifying the problem.
3. Indicate deficiencies in the evidence.
4. State the importance of the problem for audiences.
AN ILLUSTRATION OF AN INTRODUCTION
We illustrate how to compose an introduction by citing an example of a qualitative empirical article
(adapted from Creswell & Bàez, 2020; Plano Clark et al., 2002). The qualitative study examined teen
smoking and depression in one high school. In Table 5.1 we annotate an adapted version of the author’s
introduction to present the essential components applicable to a qualitative, quantitative, and mixed
methods study.
The Research Problem
In the smoking and depression Plano Clark et al. (2002) article, the opening paragraph introduced the
topic of tobacco use and health problems and cited statistical evidence for the prevalence of this
problem. Specifically, the first sentence accomplishes important objectives for an introduction: (a) piquing
interest in the study and (b) conveying a distinct research problem or issue. What effect did this first
sentence have? Would it entice a reader to read on? Was it pitched at a level so that a wide audience
could understand it? These sentences are important for opening statements and represent a narrative
hook, a term drawn from English composition.
Table 5.1 Illustration of an Introduction to a Study With Annotated Markers of Components
Exploring the Conceptions and Misconceptions of Teen Smoking in High Schools: A Multiple
Case Analysis

--- Page 141 ---
Exploring the Conceptions and Misconceptions of Teen Smoking in High Schools: A Multiple
Case Analysis
The Topic Tobacco use is a leading cause of cancer in American society (McGinnis & Foefe,
1993). Although smoking among adults has declined in recent years, it has actually
The increased for adolescents. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported
Research that smoking among high school students had risen from 27.5 percent in 1991 to 34.8
Problem percent in 1995 (USDHHS, 1996). Unless this trend is dramatically reversed, an
estimated 5 million of our nation’s children will ultimately die a premature death
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1996).
Evidence Previous research on adolescent tobacco use has focused on four primary topics.
from Several studies have examined the question of the initiation of smoking by young
Literature people, noting that tobacco use initiation begins as early as junior high school (e.g.,
Justifying Heishman et al., 1997). Other studies have focused on the prevention of smoking and
Problem tobacco use in schools. This research has led to numerous school-based prevention
programs and interventions (e.g., Sussman, Dent, Burton, Stacy, & Flay, 1995). Fewer
studies have examined “quit attempts” or cessation of smoking behaviors among
adolescents, a distinct contrast to the extensive investigations into adult cessation
attempts (Heishman et al., 1997). Of interest, as well, to researchers studying
adolescent tobacco use has been the social context and social influence of smoking
(Fearnow, Chassin, & Presson, 1998). For example, adolescent smoking may occur in
work-related situations, at home where one or more parents or caretakers smoke, at
teen social events, or at areas designated as “safe” smoking places near high schools
(McVea et al., in press).
Deficiencies Minimal research attention has been directed toward the social context of high schools
in Evidence as a site for examining adolescent tobacco use. During high school, students form peer
groups which may contribute to adolescent smoking. Often peers become a strong
social influence for behavior in general, and belonging to an athletic team, a music
group, or the “grunge” crowd can impact thinking about smoking (McVea et al., in
press). Schools are also places where adolescents spend most of their day (Fibkins,
1993) and are available research subjects. Schools provide a setting for teachers and
administrators to be role models for abstaining from tobacco use and enforcing policies
about tobacco use (OHara et al., 1999). Existing studies of adolescent tobacco use are
primarily quantitative with a focus on outcomes and transtheoretical models (Pallonen,
1998). Qualitative investigations, however, provide detailed views of students in their
own words, complex analyses of multiple perspectives, and specific school contexts of
different high schools that shape student experiences with tobacco (Creswell, in press).
Moreover, qualitative inquiry offers the opportunity to involve high school students as
co-researchers, a data collection procedure that can enhance the validity of student
views uncontaminated by adult perspectives.
Importance By examining these multiple school contexts, using qualitative approaches and involving
of Problem students as co-researchers, we can better understand the conceptions and
for misconceptions adolescents hold about tobacco use in high schools. With this
Audiences understanding, researchers can better isolate variables and develop models about
smoking behavior. Administrators and teachers can plan interventions to prevent or
change attitudes toward smoking, and school officials can assist with smoking
cessation or intervention programs.
Source: Adapted from Creswell and Bàez, 2020; Plano Clark et al., 2002.
This means that words serve to draw, engage, or hook the reader into the study. To learn how to write
good narrative hooks, study first sentences in leading journal articles in different fields of study. Often
journalists and authors provide good examples in the lead sentences of newspapers and journal articles.
We present a few examples of lead sentences from social science journals:

--- Page 142 ---
“Who controls the process of chief executive succession?” (Boeker, 1992, p. 400)
“There is a large body of literature that studies the cartographic line (a recent summary article is
Butte in field, 1985), and generalization of cartographic lines (McMaster, 1987).” (Carstensen, 1989,
p. 181)
These two examples present information easily understood by many readers. The first example
demonstrates creating reader interest by posing a question. The second example, from a quantitative-
experimental study, illustrates beginning the problem discussion with a literature perspective. Together
these examples demonstrate how authors can create a sentence so the reader is not taken into a
detailed morass of thought but lowered gently down into the topic.
We use the metaphor of the writer lowering a barrel into a well. The beginning writer plunges the barrel
(the reader) into the depths of the well (the article). The reader sees only unfamiliar material. The
experienced writer slowly lowers the barrel (the reader, again), allowing the reader to acclimate to the
depths (of the study). This lowering of the barrel begins with a narrative hook of sufficient generality,
encouraging reader understanding of the topic.
Beyond this first sentence, it is important to clearly identify the issue(s) or problem(s) that leads to a
need for the study. In our example, tobacco use causes cancer and adolescent smoking has increased.
These are problems leading to potential health issues. In applied social science research, problems arise
from issues, difficulties, and current practices in real-life situations. The research problem in a study
begins to become clear when the researcher asks, “What is the need for my study?” or “What problem
influenced the need to undertake this study?” For example, schools may experience discrimination
because they do not have multicultural guidelines; college adjunct faculty experience financial hardship
leading to the need for more equitable pay; underrepresented students are barred from universities
leading to a need to examine admission standards. These are significant research problems meriting
further study and establish a practical problem or concern to be addressed. In designing the opening
paragraphs of a proposal or study, keep in mind these ideas:
Write an opening sentence to stimulate reader interest and convey an issue to which a broad
audience can relate.
In general, refrain from using quotations—especially long ones—in the lead sentence. Such use will
be difficult for readers to grasp the key idea you want them to understand. Quotations raise many
possibilities for interpretation and create unclear beginnings.
Stay away from idiomatic expressions or trite phrases (e.g., “The lecture method remains a ‘third
rail’ among most college and university instructors.”).
Consider numeric information for impact (e.g., “Every year, an estimated 5 million Americans
experience the death of an immediate family member.”).
Clearly identify the research problem (i.e., dilemma, issue) leading to the study.
Ask yourself, “Is there a specific sentence (or sentences) in which I convey the research problem?”
Indicate why the problem is important by citing numerous references to justify the need for the study.
We sometimes say to our students that if they do not have a dozen references cited on the first
page of their proposal, they do not have a scholarly study.
Make sure that the problem is framed consistently with the approach to research in the study (e.g.,
exploratory in qualitative, examining relationships or predictors in quantitative, or describing the
qualitative or quantitative research approaches in mixed methods.
Consider and identify a single problem or multiple problems leading to a need for the study. Often,
authors present multiple research problems.
Evidence From the Literature Justifying the Problem

--- Page 143 ---
After establishing the research problem in the opening paragraphs, Plano Clark et al. (2002) discuss
previous research in the literature addressing the problem. They do not include in the introduction a
complete literature review. Later in the literature review section of a proposal researchers thoroughly
review the literature. This literature review passage should summarize large groups of studies instead of
detailing individual studies in the introduction. We tell students to reflect on their literature maps
(described in Chapter 2) and look at and summarize the broad categories in the top boxes in the map.
These broad categories illustrate large summaries of studies.
Reviewing studies in an introduction justifies the study’s importance and creates distinctions between past
studies and the proposed one. This component is called “setting the research problem within the ongoing
dialogue in the literature.” Researchers do not want to conduct a study that replicates exactly what
someone else has examined. New studies need to add to the literature or to extend or retest what others
have investigated. The ability to frame the study in this way separates novices from more experienced
researchers. The experienced researcher has reviewed and understands topics or problems in the field.
This knowledge comes from years of experience following the development of problems and their
accompanying literature.
The question often arises as to what type of literature to review. Our best advice is to review research
studies in which authors advance research questions and report data to answer them (i.e., empirical
articles). These studies might be quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods studies.
Beginning researchers often ask, “What do I do now? No research has been conducted on my topic.” Of
course, this situation may be the case in some narrowly construed topics or in new, exploratory projects
where no literature exists to document the research problem. Also, realize that a researcher proposes a
topic precisely because little research exists on it. When students say “no research can be found on my
topic,” we suggest thinking about the situation using the image of an inverted triangle. The bottom of the
apex of the inverted triangle represents the proposed scholarly study. This study is narrow and focused
(and studies may not exist on it). If one broadens the review of the literature upward from the base of the
inverted triangle, literature can be found, although it may be somewhat removed from the study at hand.
For example, past research may not address the narrow topic of at-risk children in primary school.
However, more broadly speaking, the topic of at-risk students, generally in the primary school or at any
level in education, may have been studied. The researcher would summarize the more general literature
and end with statements about narrow studies that examine at-risk students at the primary school level.
To review the literature related to the research problem for an introduction to a proposal, consider these
ideas:
Refer to the literature by summarizing groups, not individual studies (unlike the focus on single
studies in the review of the literature in Chapter 2). The intent should be to establish broad areas of
research.
To deemphasize single studies, place the in-text references at the end of a paragraph or at the end
of a summary point about several studies.
Review research studies that used quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods approaches.
Find recent literature to summarize, such as that published in the past 10 years. Cite older, valuable
studies if they have been widely referenced by others.
Deficiencies in the Evidence
After advancing the problem and reviewing the literature, the researcher then identifies deficiencies found
in this literature. The smoking and depression study (Plano Clark et al., 2002) mentions several
deficiencies in the literature, including using the high school as a site for study, studying peer groups, and
the lack of teacher and administrator role models. These literature gaps or deficiencies led us to call this
template a deficiencies model. The nature of these deficiencies varies from study to study. Deficiencies
in past literature may exist because topics with a group, sample, or population remain unexplored, or
the research needs to be replicated to see if the same findings hold because of mixed results. Also, in
qualitative research the literature may not address special populations or group, explore new sites, give
voice to underrepresented groups, or include qualitative data such as interviews and observations. In
quantitative research, the literature may show inadequate theory development, invalidated or unreliable

--- Page 144 ---
measures, or inattention to mediating variables. In mixed methods research, the literature may not include
studies incorporating quantitative and qualitative data, providing insight from connecting the databases,
mentioning the integration of them, or drawing inferences from the integration.
Regardless of the study approach, authors often mention one or several deficiencies. To locate
deficiencies, examine future research sections of published studies. They often mention limitations or new
study opportunities, and authors can reference these ideas to justify their proposed study.
Beyond mentioning the deficiencies, proposal and study writers need to tell how their planned study will
remedy or address these deficiencies. For example, because past studies overlooked an important
variable, a proposed study includes the variable and analyzes its effect. Because past studies have not
addressed the examination of Native Americans as a cultural group, a study will include them as
participants in the project.
In Examples 5.1 and 5.2, the authors point out the gaps or shortcomings of the literature.
Notice their use of key phrases to indicate the shortcomings: “what remains to be explored” and “little
empirical research.”
Example 5.1 Deficiencies in the Literature—Needed Studies
For this reason, the meaning of war and peace has been explored extensively by social scientists
(Cooper, 1965; Alvik, 1968; Rosell, 1968; Svancarova & Svancarova, 1967–68; Haavedsrud,
1970). What remains to be explored, however, is how veterans of past wars react to vivid scenes
of a new war. (Ziller, 1990, pp. 85–86)
Example 5.2 Deficiencies in the Literature—Few Studies
Despite an increased interest in micropolitics, it is surprising that so little empirical research has
actually been conducted on the topic, especially from the perspectives of subordinates. Political
research in educational settings is especially scarce: Very few studies have focused on how
teachers use power to interact strategically with school principals and what this means
descriptively and conceptually (Ball, 1987; Hoyle, 1986; Pratt, 1984). (Blase, 1989, p. 381)
In summary, when identifying deficiencies in the past literature, proposal and study developers might use
the following:
Cite several deficiencies to make a strong case for a new study.
Identify specifically the deficiencies of other studies (e.g., methodological flaws, variables
overlooked).
Write about areas overlooked by past studies, including topics, special statistical treatments,
significant implications, and other quantitative deficiencies.
Discuss how a proposed study will remedy these deficiencies and provide a unique contribution to
the scholarly literature.
Look at limitations cited in journal articles for clues about deficiencies to cite.
These deficiencies might be mentioned using a series of short paragraphs that identify three or four
shortcomings of the past research or focus on one major shortcoming, as illustrated by Plano Clark et al.
(2002) in Figure 5.1.

--- Page 145 ---
Importance of the Problem for Audiences
Writers often include a specific section describing the significance of the study for select audiences to
convey the importance of the problem. The introduction in the smoking and depression high school study
(Plano Clark et al., 2002) mentioned the contribution of the study for researchers, administrators, and
school officials. By including this section, the writer creates a clear rationale for the importance of the
study, and this section helps readers understand the wide applicability of the study. In designing this
section, one might include the following:
Three or four reasons that the study adds to the scholarly research and literature in the field
Several reasons about how the study helps improve practice
Multiple reasons as to why the study will improve policy or decision-making
Example 5.3 Significance of the Study Stated in an Introduction to a Quantitative
Study
A study by Mascarenhas (1989) examined ownership of industrial firms. He identified explicitly
decision makers, organizational members, and researchers as the audience for the study:
A study of an organization’s ownership and its domain, defined here as markets served,
product scope, customer orientation, and technology employed (Abell and Hammond,
1979; Abell, 1980; Perry and Rainey, 1988), is important for several reasons. First,
understanding relationships among ownership and domain dimensions can help to reveal
the underlying logic of organizations’ activities and can help organization members
evaluate strategies. . . . Second, a fundamental decision confronting all societies
concerns the type of institutions to encourage or adopt for the conduct of activity. . . .
Knowledge of the domain consequences of different ownership types can serve as input
to that decision. . . . Third, researchers have often studied organizations reflecting one or
two ownership types, but their findings may have been implicitly over generalized to all
organizations. (Mascarenhas, 1989, p. 582)
Finally, good introductions to research studies can end with a statement that summarizes the overall
contribution of the proposed study. The researcher can succinctly state this contribution in one sentence.
In the Plano Clark et al. (2002) study, the authors might have stated that the study provided insight into
the potential links between smoking and depression for high school students.
Summary
This chapter provides advice about composing and writing an introduction to a scholarly study.
First, consider how the introduction incorporates the research problems associated with
quantitative, qualitative, or mixed methods research. Then, use a four-part introduction as a model
or template. Called the deficiencies model, it first identifies the research problem (including a
narrative hook). Then it includes summarizing large categories of the literature that has addressed
the problem, followed by indicating one or more deficiencies in the past literature. Finally, it
addresses specific audiences that will profit from research on the problem, and the introduction
ends with a statement advancing the overall contribution of the study.
KEY TERMS

--- Page 146 ---
Deficiencies in past literature 117
Deficiencies model for an introduction 107
Narrative hook 112
Research problem 114
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Draft several examples of narrative hooks for the introduction to a study, and share these
with colleagues. Ask colleagues which narrative hook they like best, and why it draws them
into the study.
2. Write a one-page introduction to a proposed study. Include one paragraph each for the
research problem, the evidence from the literature, the deficiencies in evidence, and the
audiences who will potentially find the study of interest.
3. Write a succinct one-sentence statement of the contribution of your study.
4. Locate several research studies published in scholarly journals on your study topic. Examine
the “future research” section or statements. What advice does the author provide for
addressing limitations in the literature?
Additional Readings
Bem, D. J. (1987). Writing the empirical journal article. In M. P. Zanna & J. M. Darley (Eds.), The
compleat academic: A practical guide for the beginning social scientist (pp. 171–201). Random
House.
Opening sentences in a study invite readers to continue to look through the study. Daryl Bem
emphasizes the importance of the opening statement in published research. He provides a list of
rules for opening statements, stressing the need for clear, readable prose and a structure that
leads the reader step-by-step to the problem statement. He offers satisfactory and unsatisfactory
opening statements. Bem calls for accessible opening statements for the nonspecialist and
enlightening statements for the technically sophisticated reader.
Creswell, J. W., & Gutterman, T. (2018). Educational research: Designing, conducting, and
evaluating qualitative and quantitative research (6th ed.). Pearson Education.
Examples of introductions provide useful templates for developing a good beginning to a project.
John Creswell and Tim Gutterman include a chapter on introducing an educational research study.
They provide details about establishing the importance of a research problem and give an
example of the deficiencies model for crafting a good introduction to a study.
Maxwell, J. A. (2005). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach (2nd ed.). SAGE.
The importance of the research problem cannot be overemphasized. Joe Maxwell reflects on the
purpose of a proposal for a qualitative dissertation. One of the fundamental aspects of a proposal
is to justify the project—to help readers understand what you plan to do and why. He mentions the
importance of identifying the issues you plan to address and indicating why they are important to
study. In an example of a graduate student dissertation proposal, he shares the major issues the
student has addressed to create an effective argument for the study.
Wilkinson, A. M. (1991). The scientist’s handbook for writing papers and dissertations. Prentice
Hall.
It is useful to see how writers offer templates for writing the introduction in ways different than the
“deficiencies” model in this chapter. Antoinette Wilkinson identifies the three parts of an
introduction: (a) the derivation and statement of the problem and a discussion of its nature, (b) the

--- Page 147 ---
( ) ( )
discussion of the background of the problem, and (c) the statement of the research question. Her
book offers numerous examples of these three parts—together with a discussion of how to write
and structure an introduction. Emphasis is placed on ensuring that the introduction leads logically
and inevitably to a statement of the research question.

--- Page 148 ---
CHAPTER 6 THE PURPOSE STATEMENT
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe the relationship among the problem, the
purpose statement, and the research questions.
2. In writing a purpose statement (or study aim) for a
qualitative study, identify the three major components.
3. Identify the central phenomenon in a qualitative purpose
statement.
4. State a quantitative purpose statement with variables and
their relationships.
5. Describe the four essential components of a mixed
methods purpose statement.
INTRODUCTION
It is important to clearly state a purpose statement in the abstract
and introduction. This purpose statement establishes the intent or
objective of the research study. It represents a critical statement, and
it needs to be clear, specific, and informative. Other aspects of the
research follow from it, and readers will be lost if it is unclear. In
journal articles, researchers write the purpose statement into
introductions (and abstracts); in theses and dissertations, it often
stands as a separate section.
This chapter focuses on the purpose statement. We address the
reasons for developing it, key principles to use in its design, and
examples of good models in crafting one for a proposal or research
study.

--- Page 149 ---
SIGNIFICANCE OF A PURPOSE (OR
STUDY AIM) STATEMENT
In social science research, we typically use the term “purpose” in this
statement. In the health sciences, “study aim” is often the preferred
term. We will refer to “purpose” in this chapter. Regardless of the
name, the purpose statement indicates why the researcher conducts
the study and what the study intends to accomplish (Locke et al.,
2014). Unfortunately, proposal-writing texts give little attention to the
purpose statement, and method writers often incorporate it into
discussions about other topics, such as problem statements or
research questions or hypotheses. Wilkinson (1991), for example,
refers to the purpose within the context of the research question and
objective. Other authors frame it as an aspect of the research
problem (Castetter & Heisler, 1977). However, closely examining their
discussions indicates that they both refer to the purpose statement as
the central, organizing idea in a study.
This passage is called the purpose statement because it conveys the
overall intent of a proposed study in a sentence or several sentences.
In proposals, researchers need to distinguish clearly among the
purpose statement, the research problem, and the research
questions. In Figure 6.1, the problem represents an issue leading to a
study’s need, such as people refusing to get COVID vaccinations. In
turn, the study narrows to the purpose or aim of the study. This
purpose specifies the specific study addressing the problem, such as
the need to identify the many factors influencing the refusal to get
vaccinated. In this example, this purpose models a statement for a
quantitative project. Then the research questions narrow the study
further by posing one or more questions to be answered. In the
example, the overall question in the study is, “Are participants
refusing vaccination because they worry about long-term health
consequences?” Although many factors may influence a decision to
get vaccinated, we have chosen concerns about long-term health
benefits to address. Finally, the study narrows again to data
collection, where we gather information to answer the research
question. In our example, we select the use of a mailed questionnaire
(or survey) to gather the data. Thus, the purpose statement sets forth
the broader intent of the study. It is not the problem or issue or the
research questions in the study (see Chapter 5). Moving through the
steps of the problem and on to the data illustrates successive

--- Page 150 ---
narrowing of the study. The purpose builds on a need (the problem)
and is refined into specific questions (the research questions).
Given the importance of the purpose statement, it is helpful to set it
apart from other aspects of the proposal or study and frame it for
readers as a single sentence or paragraph. Although qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods purpose statements share similar
topics, we describe each approach in the following paragraphs and
illustrate a good statement with fill-in scripts for constructing a
thorough and manageable statement.
Description
Figure 6.1 Relationship Among the Problem, the
Purpose (Aim), the Research Questions, and the Data
A QUALITATIVE PURPOSE STATEMENT
Good qualitative purpose statements contain information about the
central phenomenon explored in the study, the participants in the
study, and the research site. The central phenomenon is the one
single concept being explored in the qualitative study. Researchers

--- Page 151 ---
explore this phenomenon by gathering data from participants and a
site for research. A qualitative purpose statement conveys an
emerging design where the procedures can change during the study
and uses specific terms drawn from the language of qualitative inquiry
(Schwandt, 2014). Thus, several basic design features for a purpose
statement or study aim for qualitative research follow:
Use words such as purpose, intent, study aim, or objective to
introduce this statement as the central study idea. Set the
statement off as a separate sentence or paragraph, and use the
language of research, such as “The purpose (or intent or
objective) of this study is (was) (will be). . . .” Researchers often
use the present or past verb tense in journal articles and
dissertations and the future tense in proposals in planning a
project for the future.
Focus on a single central phenomenon (or concept or idea).
Narrow the study to one idea to be explored or understood. A
qualitative purpose statement does not convey relating two or
more variables or comparing two or more groups, as in
quantitative research. Instead, it advances a single phenomenon,
recognizing that the study may evolve into exploring relationships
or comparing groups. This evolution cannot always be
anticipated at a study’s beginning. A project might begin with the
central phenomenon of exploring teacher identity and the
marginalization of this identity in a school (Huber & Whelan,
1999), the meaning of baseball culture in a study of the work and
talk of stadium employees (Trujillo, 1992), or how individuals
cognitively represent AIDS (Anderson & Spencer, 2002). These
examples illustrate a focus on a single idea.
Use action verbs to convey how learning will take place. Action
verbs and phrases, such as understand, develop, explore,
examine the meaning of, generate, or discover, keep the inquiry
open and exploratory.
Use neutral words and phrases—nondirectional language—such
as exploring the “self-expression experiences of individuals”
rather than the “successful self-expression of individuals.” Other
words and phrases that may be problematic include useful,
positive, and informing—all words suggesting a directional

--- Page 152 ---
outcome that may or may not occur. McCracken (1988) referred
to the need in qualitative interviews to let the respondents
describe their experiences. Interviewers (or purpose statement
writers) can violate easily the “law of nondirection” (McCracken,
1988, p. 21) in qualitative research by using words that suggest
a directional orientation.
Provide a general working definition of the central phenomenon
or idea, especially if a broad audience cannot understand the
phenomenon. Consistent with the rhetoric of qualitative research,
view this definition as not fixed but tentative and evolving
throughout a study based on information from participants.
Hence, a writer might say, “A tentative definition at this time for
_____________ (central phenomenon) is. . . .” This definition is
not to be confused with the detailed definition of terms as
discussed in the literature review of Chapter 2. Here the intent is
to convey to readers early in a proposal or research study a
general sense of the central phenomenon. With a brief definition,
readers can better understand the focus of the study.
Include words denoting the qualitative approach used for data
collection, analysis, and the process of research. We introduced
several qualitative approaches in Chapter 1, such as a
descriptive analysis, ethnography, grounded theory, case study,
phenomenology, narrative approach, or some other approach.
Mention the participants in the study, such as individuals, groups,
or organizations.
Identify the site for the research, such as homes, classrooms,
organizations, programs, or events. Describe this site in enough
detail so that the reader knows exactly where a study will take
place.
The purpose statement may delimit the scope of participants or
research sites in the study. For example, the study may involve
only women. The research site may be limited to one
metropolitan city or to one small geographic area. The central
phenomenon may be limited to individuals in business
organizations who participate on creative teams. These
delimitations help further define the parameters of the research
study.

--- Page 153 ---
Although considerable variation exists in the inclusion of these points
in purpose statements, a good dissertation or thesis proposal should
contain many of them. Here is a script helpful in drafting a complete
statement. A script contains the major words and ideas of a
statement and provides space for researchers to insert their project
information.
The purpose (or study aim) of this _____ (qualitative study
or more specifically a qualitative approach, such as
ethnography, case study, or other type) study is (was? will
be?) to _____ (understand? explore? develop? generate?
discover?) the _____ (central phenomenon being studied)
for _____ (the participants, such as individuals, groups, or
organizations) at _____ (research site). At this stage in the
research, the _____ (central phenomenon being studied) will
be generally defined as _____ (provide a general definition).
Examples 6.1–6.4 may not illustrate all the elements of this script
perfectly, but they represent adequate models to study and follow.
Example 6.1 A Purpose Statement in a Qualitative
Phenomenology Study
Lauterbach (1993) studied five women who lost a baby in late
pregnancy and their memories and experiences of this loss.
Her purpose statement was as follows:
The phenomenological inquiry, as part of uncovering
meaning, articulated “essences” of meaning in
mothers’ lived experiences when their wished-for
babies died. Using the lens of the feminist
perspective, the focus was on mothers’ memories
and their “living through” experience. This perspective
facilitated breaking through the silence surrounding
mothers’ experiences; it assisted in articulating and
amplifying mothers’ memories and their stories of
loss. Methods of inquiry included phenomenological

--- Page 154 ---
reflection on data elicited by existential investigation
of mothers’ experiences, and investigation of the
phenomenon in the creative arts. (p. 134)
We found Lauterbach’s (1993) purpose statement in the opening
section of the journal article under the heading “Aim of Study.” Thus,
the heading calls attention to this statement. “Mothers’ lived
experiences” would be the central phenomenon explored in the study.
The author uses the action word portray to discuss the meaning (a
neutral word) of these experiences. The author further defines the
experiences examined when she identifies “memories” and “lived
through” experiences. Throughout this passage, Lauterbach uses the
qualitative approach of phenomenology. Also, the passage conveys
that the participants were mothers. Later in the article the reader
learns that the author interviewed a convenience sample of five
mothers, each of whom experienced a perinatal death of a child in her
home.
Example 6.2 A Purpose Statement in a Qualitative
Case Study
Frelin (2015) explored the relationship of a secondary school
teacher who negotiated educational relationships with
students who had a history of school failure. This teacher,
Gunilla, was an upper secondary teacher of Swedish and
social studies with 10 years of teaching experience. The study
reported Gunilla’s practices of negotiating relationships with
students labeled as failures. Gunilla’s school was a small
municipal school with an upper secondary school program
offering individual solutions for students. These students had
completed 9 years of compulsory school but were ineligible
for national upper secondary schools, higher education, or
vocational programs. The detailed purpose statement for the
study read this way:
The purpose of this article is to trace and exemplify
relational and professional practices that can help

--- Page 155 ---
teachers and other school staff to assist students to
overcome obstacles and be more successful at
school. (p. 590)
This general purpose was found in the opening paragraph of the
study. A more complete description of the purpose occurred in a
summary of the results:
The results have provided illustrations of relational practices
aimed at negotiating educational relationships with students
who have been labelled as failures. Providing detailed
examples of how Gunilla worked to negotiate relationships
and the qualities of trust, humaneness and students’ self-
images, the complex and temporal nature of teachers’ work
with making relationships educational is highlighted. (p. 598)
We felt that the author might have included more detail (as found in
the summary after the results) in the opening purpose statement.
Clearly, the author indicated the central phenomenon as relational and
professional practices. To “trace” or to “illustrate” indicated the
qualitative action verbs used in the study. As a case study, the author
focused on the actions of one teacher, Gunilla, as a case for study.
Example 6.3 A Purpose Statement in a Narrative
Study
Chan’s (2010) study explored the school and family
experiences for one Chinese immigrant student, Ai Mei Zhang.
Her academic performance and behavior by teachers and
peers at school and by immigrant parents at home shaped her
ethnic identity. The tension between school and home led to
conflicting stories. We located this purpose statement:
In the present study, I examined the experiences of
one Chinese immigrant student, Ai Mei Zhang. I

--- Page 156 ---
explore her participation in her Canadian middle
school curriculum as an interaction of student,
teacher, and parent narratives, a story of interwoven
lives (Clendenin et al., 2006). . . . I examined ways in
which her sense of ethnic identity may be shaped by
expectations for her academic performance and her
behavior in her school and her home. (p. 113)
We found this purpose statement in the introduction to the study. The
first sentence focused on the student’s experiences; the second
sentence identified the central phenomenon of “ethnic identity.” We
clearly can identify the participant, one Chinese immigrant student,
and the setting as the school and the family environment. The author
described the qualitative approach as a long-term, school-based
narrative inquiry with substantial observations of the student’s school
classroom. The author also reviewed documents, held conversations
with key participants, and took field notes during observations. This
study represented a narrative research project involving one
participant.
Example 6.4 A Purpose Statement in a Grounded
Theory Study
Harley et al. (2007) felt that regular physical activity was
linked to a reduced risk of obesity and chronic diseases. They
conducted in-depth interviews with physically active African
American women and developed a rigorous theoretical
explanation of human behavior grounded in the data. They
stated the purpose of their study:
The purpose of this study was to understand the
behavioral process among African American women
through the development of a theoretical framework
explaining the pathways linking the key factors
together that result in subsequent integration of
physical activity into the lifestyle. (p. 99)

--- Page 157 ---
In this statement, the central phenomenon was the integration of
physical activity and lifestyle. The word “understand” signaled a
qualitative study. Grounded theory as a qualitative approach led to
developing a theoretical model that explained an overall model of
physical activity and lifestyle.
A QUANTITATIVE PURPOSE STATEMENT
Quantitative purpose statements differ considerably from the
qualitative statements in terms of the language and a focus on
relating or comparing variables or constructs. Constructs is a term
used for a more abstract, general meaning of a variable. In our
discussion, we will use the term variable to identify an entity that
varies and is measurable. Recall from Chapter 3 the types of major
variables: independent (or predictor), mediating, moderating,
confounding, and dependent (or outcome).
The design of a quantitative purpose statement includes the variables
in the study and their relationships, the participants, and the research
site. It also includes language associated with quantitative research
and the deductive testing of theories. The elements of a quantitative
purpose statement can include the proposed major variables in a
study (independent, mediating, dependent) and reference a visual
model identifying the order or sequence of the variables.
Quantitative variables will typically be related, as in a survey, or
compared, as in an experiment. Some mention could also occur about
the measurement and observation of the variables.
The major components of a good quantitative purpose statement
include the following in the order mentioned here:
Include words to signal the major intent of the study, such as
purpose, intent, or objective. Start with “The purpose (or
objective or intent) of this study is (was, will be) . . .”
Mention the specific type of quantitative approach (such as
survey or experimental research) used in the study. By

--- Page 158 ---
incorporating this information, the researcher anticipates the
methods’ discussion and enables a reader to associate the
relationship of variables to the inquiry approach.
Identify the theory, model, or conceptual framework and how it
is used to explain or predict the relationship of variables. At this
point, one does not need to describe the theory in detail. In
Chapter 3, we suggested the possibility of writing a separate
“Theoretical Perspective” section for this purpose. Mentioning it
in the purpose statement provides emphasis on the importance
of the theory and foreshadows its use in the study.
Identify the variables—independent, dependent, mediating, and
moderating variables.
Use words that connect the variables such as “relationship,”
“comparison,” “determinants,” “correlation,” or “prediction” to
indicate the relationship among the variables. Also, a purpose
statement could be to “describe” variables. Most quantitative
studies employ one or more options for discussing variables in
the purpose statement. A combination of comparing and relating
might also exist—for example, an experiment in which the
researcher has two or more treatment groups and a continuous
independent variable. Although one typically finds studies
comparing two or more groups in experiments, it is also possible
to compare groups in a survey study.
Position or order the variables from left to right in the purpose
statement—with the independent variable followed by the
dependent variable. Place intervening or mediating variables
between the independent and dependent variables. Many
researchers also place the moderating variables as related to
the independent variables. In experiments, the independent
variable will always be the manipulated variable.
Reference the participants (or the unit of analysis) in the study,
and mention the research site.
Define key variables, preferably using accepted definitions found
in the literature. General definitions are included at this point to
help the reader best understand the purpose statement. They do
not replace specific, operational definitions found later when a
writer has a “Definition of Terms” section in a proposal (including

--- Page 159 ---
details about how variables will be measured). Researchers
often define the key variables in a table that provides the name
of the variable, its definition, and an example of its use in the
method section. Also, delimitations affecting the scope of the
study might be mentioned, such as the data collection or
samples’ scope.
Based on these points, a quantitative purpose statement script can
include these ideas:
The purpose of this _________ (experiment? survey?) study
is (was? will be?) to test the theory of _________ that
__________ (explains, predicts) that the _________
(independent variable) _________ (compares? relates?) to
__________ (dependent variable). This study aims to recruit
__________ (participants) at __________ (the research
site). The independent variable(s) __________ will be
defined as __________ (provide a definition). The
dependent variable(s) will be defined as __________
(provide a definition).
Examples 6.5–6.7 illustrate many of the elements in these scripts.
The first two studies are surveys and the last one an experiment.
Example 6.5 A Purpose Statement in a Survey Study
A survey study by Shawyer et al. (2017) examined the mental
health of refugee and asylum seekers in the Refugee Health
Service (RHS) settlement in Australia. The study focused on
mental health problems of psychiatric disorders and
posttraumatic stress disorders (PTSD) of people in the
settlement. The study aims read that the study will do the
following:
1. Report estimates of overall prevalence of mental
disorders including PTSD among RHS clients.
2. Establish matched risk ratios by comparing RHS clientele
prevalence findings with a matched Australian-born

--- Page 160 ---
comparison group.
3. Comment on the acceptability of the set of measures
used in the survey for RHS clients as a pilot for use in
screening for mental illness in this service and elsewhere.
(p. 2)
In this example, we see multiple statements about the study aim. It
began with a descriptive phase focused on “prevalence.” Then in the
next phase it reported on a comparison between the RHS sample and
a matched sample using a community survey. Notice that the purpose
statement used “comparison” as a quantitative word. It also
mentioned measurement and its acceptability in the survey. We found
the study aim at the beginning of the study in the background section.
The study design used a cross sectional survey of 135 refugees and
asylum seekers using mental health instruments.
Example 6.6 A Purpose Statement in a Dissertation
Survey Study
DeGraw (1984) completed a doctoral dissertation in education
on the topic of educators working in adult correctional
institutions. Under a section titled “Statement of the Problem,”
he advanced the purpose of the study:
The purpose of this study was to examine the
relationship between personal characteristics and the
job motivation of certified educators who taught in
selected state adult correctional institutions in the
United States. Personal characteristics were divided
into background information about the respondent
(i.e., institutional information, education level, prior
training, etc.) and information about the respondents’
thoughts of changing jobs. The examination of
background information was important to this study
because it was hoped it would be possible to identify
characteristics and factors contributing to significant
differences in mobility and motivation. The second
part of the study asked the respondents to identify

--- Page 161 ---
those motivational factors of concern to them. Job
motivation was defined by six general factors
identified in the educational work components study
(EWCS) questionnaire (Miskel & Heller, 1973).
These six factors are: potential for personal
challenge and development; competitiveness;
desirability and reward of success; tolerance for
work pressures; conservative security; and
willingness to seek reward in spite of uncertainty vs.
avoidance. (pp. 4–5)
This statement included several components of a good purpose
statement. It was presented in a separate section, used the word
relationship, defined major variables, stated the sample, and
highlighted the questionnaire in the study. Further, it ordered the
variables from independent to dependent, allowing a reader to
understand the variables clearly.
Example 6.7 A Purpose Statementin an Experimental
Study
Esposito et al. (2017) studied the need for safe and
satisfactory online shopping experiences for vulnerable
consumers, such as the elderly and less educated citizens.
The authors conducted an experiment to test the effectiveness
of online “nudges” to prevent the purchase of “incompatible”
digital products (products incompatible with devices owned by
consumers). This lab experiment involved three types of
“nudges,” and the study examined the interaction of
demographics—age and education—and with “nudges.” The
study purpose was:
Consumers must be able to find and interpret this
information and use it to make good decisions.
Without this ability, consumers will make mistakes,
leading to disappointment, frustration, and ultimately
lack of trust in online shopping. The evidence from

--- Page 162 ---
behavioural economics suggests that the way
information is presented can either facilitate or
hamper decisions that are in the consumer’s own
best interest. This study was based on this
assumption and sought to test how small changes to
a website’s design can affect purchase behaviour,
with particular attention to the interaction with socio-
demographic characteristics of the participant. (p. 2)
This purpose statement was found at the end of the introduction. As
with many empirical studies, the purpose statement was short and
without detail about the variables, the participants, or the specific
interventions. These details emerged later in the research questions
or hypotheses. In this example, we saw that the problem leading to
the study became mixed with the specific purpose statement. The
purpose statement was brief and provided an overall orientation of
the study. A total of 626 participants at a laboratory in Spain
participated in this experimental study. The authors used a 3 × 2 × 2
design with the independent variables, “nudges,” as warning
messages (no warning, traditional warning, emotive warning), style
(information presented as a logo or text), and information
presentation (on the product description page or at checkout). The
treatment involved informing the participants that the products ran
only Windows operating systems. Then, as products were displayed,
information about the operability of each product was presented.
Participants were also given virtual currency to spend on the products
of five films and games. The outcome variable was the number of
incompatible goods purchased. Thus, small changes in website
design for a product could influence purchase behavior as stated in
the purpose statement.
A MIXED METHODS PURPOSE
STATEMENT
A mixed methods purpose statement contains the overall intent of
the study, information about both the quantitative and qualitative
strands of the study, the integration (or combination) of both strands,

--- Page 163 ---
and the insight expected from the data integration. These statements
need to be identified early in the introduction, and they provide major
signposts for the reader to understand the quantitative, qualitative,
and integrative parts of a study. Several guidelines might direct the
organization and presentation of the mixed methods purpose
statement, and we introduce them in the order we prefer for writing a
mixed methods purpose statement or study aim:
Begin with words that signal intent, such as “The purpose of,”
“The study aim is,” or “The intent of.” Place this statement early
in the mixed methods study.
Indicate the overall intent of the study from a content
perspective, such as “The intent is to learn about organizational
effectiveness in auto industry companies” or “The intent is to
develop health policies for families with stepchildren.” To arrive at
this intent, ask yourself what you want to accomplish by the end
of the study. We sometimes refer to this as the “end point” of a
study. This end point is stronger if it has practical value (value for
specific audiences) instead of only understanding a concept or
phenomenon (as is often the case in dissertation or thesis
projects). In this way, the reader has an anchor to understand
the overall study before learning about the quantitative and
qualitative parts.
Indicate the type of mixed methods design, such as a
convergent design, an explanatory sequential design, an
exploratory sequential design, or a complex design (as discussed
in Chapter 10).
Include language in the mixed methods purpose statement that
signals quantitative and qualitative research. The authors should
include quantitative words indicating testing, relating variables, or
comparing groups. They also should mention qualitative words
such as exploring, understanding, generating, and developing.
Discuss the insight to result from collecting quantitative and
qualitative data, combining the data (integrating) and drawing
conclusions from the integration. This insight refers to the
inferences or conclusions from combining the data. Here are

--- Page 164 ---
some possibilities of insight (see Chapter 10 for more detail
about these insights):
Insight of a more complete understanding of a research
problem by comparing quantitative and qualitative results
from the two databases (a convergent design).
Insight explaining the quantitative results with a qualitative
follow-up to understand participant perspectives in more
detail (an explanatory sequential design).
Insight about how to develop or improve a quantitative
measure by first talking to participants and gathering
qualitative data before administering a quantitative measure
or scale (an exploratory sequential design).
Insight about adding qualitative, quantitative data, or both
into a framework or process (e.g., an experiment, a case
study, an evaluation) to enrich the framework or process (a
complex design, see Chapter 10).
Based on these elements, three examples of mixed methods purpose
statement scripts follow based on the convergent, explanatory
sequential, and exploratory sequential designs (Creswell & Plano
Clark, 2018). This first example of a mixed methods purpose
statement is a script for a convergent mixed methods design in which
quantitative and qualitative data are collected and analyzed
separately and the two databases compared to best understand a
research problem.
This mixed methods study will address _________ (overall
intent of study). A convergent mixed methods design will be
used, and it is a type of design in which qualitative and
quantitative data are collected to provide multiple
perspectives on a problem or question. In this study,
_________ (quantitative data) will be used to test the theory
of _________ (the theory) that predicts or explains that
_________ (independent variables) will _________
(positively, negatively) influence the _________ (dependent

--- Page 165 ---
variables) for _________ (participants) at _________ (the
site). The _________ (type of qualitative data) will explore
_________ (the central phenomenon) for _________
(participants) at _________ (the site). The insight to emerge
from combining the two databases will _________ (provide
a more complete understanding of the problem, examine
convergence of the databases, validate one database with
the other).
The second script illustrates a mixed methods purpose statement for
an explanatory sequential design in which the intent is to understand
the quantitative database at a deeper level using follow-up qualitative
data.
This study will address _________ (overall intent of study).
An explanatory sequential mixed methods design will be
used, and it will involve collecting quantitative data first and
then explaining the quantitative results with in-depth follow-
up qualitative data. In the first quantitative phase of the
study, _________ (quantitative instrument) data will be
collected from _________ (participants) at _________
(research site) to test _________ (name of theory) to
assess whether _________ (independent variables) relate
to _________ (dependent variables). The second qualitative
phase will be conducted as a follow-up to the quantitative
results to help explain the quantitative results in more depth.
The insight to emerge from explaining the quantitative results
with qualitative data will _________ (provide a more
detailed analysis of the quantitative data, explain surprising
findings, explain the relationship among variables).
The final script is an illustration of the purpose statement that might
be used for an exploratory sequential design. This design’s intent is to
develop measures (or instruments) that work with a sample by first
collecting qualitative data and then using it to design measures or test
an instrument with a sample of a population.

--- Page 166 ---
This study addresses _________ (overall intent of study).
The purpose of this exploratory sequential design will be to
first qualitatively explore with a small sample, design or
modify a quantitative assessment (e.g., instrument, website,
experimental intervention activities, new variables) based on
qualitative findings, and then to test this designed or
modified quantitative assessment with a large sample. The
first phase of the study will be a qualitative exploration of
_________ (the central phenomenon) in which _________
(types of data) will be collected from _________
(participants) at _________ (research site). From this initial
exploration, the qualitative findings will be used to design a
cultural or context-specific quantitative assessment that can
be tested with a large sample. This test will _________
(relate, compare) _________ (quantitative data) collected
from _________ (participants) at _________ (research
site). The insight to emerge from designing a quantitative
assessment based on qualitative data will be _________ (an
instrument better suited to the sample and population, a
contextually specific quantitative assessment).
In other mixed methods purpose statements, the intent may be to
bring in qualitative data or qualitative and quantitative data into a
framework or process (such as an experiment or an evaluation).
More about these types of approaches are found in complex designs
(mentioned in Chapter 10) and in Creswell and Plano Clark (2018).
It is helpful to look closely at several examples of purpose statements
found in recent published articles. Although these examples may not
include all elements of the scripts, they serve as examples of
reasonably complete purpose statements that clearly convey the
purpose of a mixed methods study. We limit the discussion to three
core types of design: (a) a convergent design (Example 6.8), (b) an
explanatory sequential design (Example 6.9), and (c) an exploratory
sequential design (Example 6.10). Other designs that expand these
possibilities will be detailed further in Chapter 10.

--- Page 167 ---
Example 6.8 A Convergent Mixed Methods Purpose
Statement
Classen and colleagues (2007) developed a health promotion
model for older driver safety. Conducting a large secondary
analysis of a national database, they examined the risk and
protective factors influencing driver injuries (the quantitative
phase). They also conducted a qualitative meta-synthesis of
six studies to determine narrative results about needs, factors
influencing safety, and safety priorities of older driver
stakeholders (the qualitative phase). They then compared the
two databases to integrate the results from both sets of data.
Their purpose statement was as follows:
This study provided an explicit socio-ecological view
explaining the interrelation of possible causative
factors, an integrated summary of these factors, and
empirical guidelines for developing public health
interventions to promote older driver safety. Using a
mixed methods approach, we were able to compare
and integrate main findings from a national crash
dataset with perspectives of stakeholders. (p. 677)
This passage was written into the abstract and should have been
better inserted into the introduction. The authors used key words in
mixed methods by discussing their comparison of the national data
set (quantitative data) with the perspectives of stakeholders
(qualitative data set). Thus, it indicated the use of both quantitative
and qualitative data, although the authors might have given more
detail about the theory (a model was advanced at the beginning of
the study), the specific variables analyzed, and the central
phenomenon of the qualitative phase of the study.
Example 6.9 An Explanatory Sequential Mixed
Methods Purpose Statement

--- Page 168 ---
Ivankova and Stick (2007) studied factors contributing to
students’ persistence in a distributed doctoral program
(distance online learning). They first collected survey data to
examine external and internal program factors predictive of
student persistence, and they followed up with qualitative
interviews of students that grouped into four categories of
persistence. They ended by advancing case studies of four
types of graduate persisters. The purpose statement was as
follows:
The purpose of this mixed methods sequential
explanatory study was to identify factors contributing
to students’ persistence in the ELHE program by
obtaining quantitative results from a survey of 278
current and former students and then following up
with four purposefully selected individuals to explore
those results in more depth through a qualitative
case study analysis. In the first, quantitative phase of
the study, the research questions focused on how
selected internal and external variables to the ELHE
program (program-related, advisor- and faculty-
related, institutional-related, student-related factors,
and external factors) served as predictors to
students’ persistence in the program. In the second,
qualitative phase, four case studies from distinct
participant groups explored in-depth the results from
the statistical tests. In this phase, the research
questions addressed seven internal and external
factors, found to have differently contributed to the
function discriminating the four groups: program,
online learning environment, faculty, student support
services, self-motivation, virtual community, and
academic advisor. (p. 95)
In this example, the purpose statement closely followed the script
advanced earlier for an explanatory sequential design. We found the
statement in the last paragraph of the study’s introduction. It began
with an overall intent statement, followed by the first quantitative
phase (including the specific variables examined), and then the

--- Page 169 ---
qualitative follow-up phase. It used mixed methods words, such as to
“identify” the factors (quantitative factors) and “explore” the results
(qualitatively). It ended with the four case studies and the mixed
methods rationale to use the case studies to explore the results from
the statistical tests further.
Example 6.10 An Exploratory Sequential Mixed
Methods Purpose Statement
Enosh and colleagues (2015) are researchers in social work
and human services. Their 2015 exploratory sequential mixed
methods study examined social workers’ exposure to different
forms of violence perpetrated by their clients. The overall
purpose of their study was to explore social workers’
experiences with client violence, develop an instrument for
measuring violence, and obtain generalized information about
client violence for social workers across different contexts.
They stated their purpose statement as follows:
Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop a
behavior-based instrument that could be used to
compare between different types of workplaces,
services (health, tourism), sectors (public, private),
and occupations (social workers, nurses, bank
workers, hotel personnel). In the current study, we
have developed and validated the instrument for one
specific population: social workers. (p. 274)
To accomplish the study’s purpose, Enosh et al. (2015) reported that
their exploratory sequential mixed methods study unfolded in “distinct
stages of research” (p. 283). We identified the purpose statement in
the last section of the study’s introduction. They began their study
with a qualitative exploration of social workers’ experiences with client
violence using qualitative interviews. In the second stage of the study,
the researchers used the qualitative findings to develop the Client
Violence Questionnaire (CVQ). Once the instrument was developed,
Enosh and colleagues initiated the final quantitative phase of the

--- Page 170 ---
exploratory design. The authors implemented two different survey
procedures to apply and test the developed instrument. Notice the
use of mixed methods language. They “developed” (qualitative phase)
and “validated” (quantitative phase) the instrument. The authors
identified the overall intent, the collection of both quantitative and
qualitative data, and the reason for collecting both forms of data.
Summary
This chapter emphasizes the primary importance of a purpose
statement. This statement advances the central idea in a
study. As such, it represents a critically important statement.
Researchers describe this statement as a purpose statement
or a study aim. In writing a qualitative purpose statement, a
researcher needs to identify a single central phenomenon and
to pose a tentative definition for it. Also, the researcher
includes in this statement strong action words, such as
discover, develop, or understand; uses nondirectional
language; and mentions the qualitative approach, the
participants, and the research site. In a quantitative purpose
statement, the researcher states the theory being tested and
the variables and their descriptions, relationships, or
comparisons. It is important to position the independent
variable first and the dependent variable(s) second. Words
such as relationship, correlation, and description are found in
quantitative purpose statements. The researcher conveys the
quantitative approach, the participants, and the research site
for the investigation. In some purpose statements, the
researcher also defines the key variables used in the study. In
a mixed methods study, a purpose statement includes a
statement of intent, the type of mixed methods design, the
forms of qualitative and quantitative data collection and
analysis, and the insight to be gained from combining the two
databases. Researchers should also use words that convey a
quantitative strand of the study (e.g., testing, relating
variables, comparing groups) and a qualitative strand (e.g.,
exploring, generating, understanding).

--- Page 171 ---
KEY TERMS
Central phenomenon 125
Constructs 130
Mixed methods purpose statement 134
Purpose statement 123
Qualitative purpose statements 125
Quantitative purpose statements 130
Script 127
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Using the script for a qualitative purpose statement we
provide in this chapter, write a statement for a project by
completing the blanks. Also, make this statement short,
and state it in one paragraph.
2. Using the script for a quantitative purpose statement in
this chapter, write a statement for a project by completing
the blanks. Also, make this statement short, and state it
in one paragraph.
3. Using the script for a mixed methods purpose statement
in this chapter, write a purpose statement for a project by
completing the blanks. Keep this statement short, and
state it in one paragraph. Include the potential insight to
be gained by combining the two databases.
Additional Readings

--- Page 172 ---
Creswell, J. W., & Plano Clark, V. L. (2018). Designing and
conducting mixed methods research (3rd ed.). SAGE.
Examples can illustrate how to write good purpose statements
or study aims. John W. Creswell and Vicki L. Plano Clark have
authored an overview and introduction to mixed methods
research that covers the entire process of research from
writing an introduction, collecting data, analyzing data, to
interpreting and writing mixed methods studies. In their
chapter on the introduction, they discuss qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed methods purpose statements. They
provide scripts and examples of mixed methods designs and
overall guidelines for writing these statements.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2016). Designing qualitative
research (6th ed.). SAGE.
It is useful to consider the reasons for writing a purpose
statement into a study. Catherine Marshall and Gretchen
Rossman call attention to the major intent of the study: the
purpose of the study. They recommend embedding this
section in the introductory topic discussion and stating it in a
sentence or two. It tells the reader what the results of the
research are likely to accomplish.
The authors characterize purposes as exploratory,
explanatory, descriptive, and emancipatory. They also mention
that the purpose statement includes the unit of analysis (e.g.,
individuals, dyads, or groups).
Wilkinson, A. M. (1991). The scientist’s handbook for writing
papers and dissertations. Prentice Hall.
Placement of a purpose statement or study aim needs to be
considered in good research. Antoinette Wilkinson calls the
purpose statement the “immediate objective” of the research
study. She states that the purpose of the objective is to
answer the research question. Further, the objective of the
study needs to be presented in the introduction, although it
may be implicitly stated as the subject of the research, the
paper, or the method. If stated explicitly, the objective is found
at the end of the introduction. It might also be found near the

--- Page 173 ---
beginning or in the middle of a study, depending on the article
structure.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
The stages, with an example in each stage, are as follows:
The problem: People are refusing to get vaccinated for COVID.
The purpose or aim: Purpose of study is to identify why, the
factors.
The research questions: Are participants refusing vaccination
because they suspect long-term health consequences?
The data: A mailed questionnaire to collect data.

--- Page 174 ---
CHAPTER 7 RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND
HYPOTHESES
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify the types of research questions and hypotheses
used in a quantitative study.
2. Learn how to write a good qualitative central question and
sub-questions.
3. Describe how to craft a mixed methods question
describing the intent and procedures for a mixed methods
study.
INTRODUCTION
Investigators place signposts to carry the reader through a plan for a
study. The first signpost is the purpose statement, which establishes
the central intent for the study. The next are the research questions
or hypotheses narrowing the purpose statement to predictions about
what will be learned or questions to be answered in the study. This
chapter begins by advancing several principles in designing
quantitative research questions and hypotheses. We provide helpful
scripts for writing these questions and hypotheses. We also discuss a
model for writing descriptive and inferential questions or hypotheses.
Then we turn to qualitative research and focus on writing research
questions. Qualitative research uses research questions and not
hypotheses because the researcher does not want to predict a
direction for study outcomes.
Finally, this chapter advances the use of research questions and
hypotheses in mixed methods studies and incorporates the latest
thinking about forming quantitative questions or hypotheses, a
qualitative question, and a mixed methods question. This mixed
methods question, a recent addition in research methodology,

--- Page 175 ---
addresses what the researcher will learn from combining (or
integrating) the quantitative and qualitative data.
QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH QUESTIONS
AND HYPOTHESES
In quantitative studies, investigators use quantitative research
questions and hypotheses to shape and focus the purpose of the
study. Quantitative research questions pose questions about the
relationships among variables in a study. Quantitative hypotheses,
in contrast, are predictions the researcher makes about the expected
relationships among variables. Testing hypotheses employs statistical
procedures in which the investigator draws inferences about a
population from a study sample (see also Chapter 8). Experiments or
intervention studies, using a comparison among groups, are guided
by formal hypotheses.
Guidelines for writing good quantitative research questions and
hypotheses include the following.
State variables in research questions or hypotheses.
Quantitative studies typically use three types. The researcher
may compare groups on an independent variable to see its
impact on a dependent variable as in an experiment or group
comparison. Alternatively, the investigator may relate one or
more predictor variables to one or more outcome variables in a
survey project. In each case, the researcher may describe
responses to the independent/predictor, mediating, or
dependent/outcome variables reporting scores with means,
standard deviations, and ranges.
Include a theory. The most rigorous form of quantitative research
follows from a test of a theory (see Chapter 3) and the
specification of research questions or hypotheses that logically
follow or challenge the theory. The researcher adapts a theory
(often from the literature) to fit a specific study.
Research questions can be descriptive questions where the
intent is to describe a single variable. Alternatively, the research

--- Page 176 ---
questions can state relationship questions among variables.
Create a directional alternative hypothesis. In formal
hypothesis testing language there are two basic forms of
hypotheses: (a) null and (b) alternative. A null hypothesis
makes a prediction that in the general population, no relationship
or no significant difference exists between groups on a variable.
The intent is to disprove a theory by stating a negative
expectation. The wording is, “There is no difference (or
relationship)” between the groups. Most hypotheses focus on
offering an alternative hypothesis. An alternative hypothesis
makes a prediction about a significant relationship between
variables. Moreover, it is important to make this alternative
hypothesis directional, such that it is a prediction in a certain
direction. For example, “it is predicted that there is a positive
relationship between height and weight, such that taller people
are more likely to weigh more” or “the higher the relationship
skills, the higher the leadership potential.”
Use directional words of quantitative research, such as affect,
influence, predict, impact, determine, cause, and relate.
We provide several scripts for help in writing quantitative research
questions and types of hypotheses. Fill in the blanks in these scripts.
Example 7.1 Script for a Descriptive Quantitative
Research Question
What is the frequency and variation of scores on _______
(name the variable) for _______ (participants) in the study? (a
descriptive question)
This example describes the frequency and variation of variable
scores. The data analysis comprises means, standard
deviations, variance, and range of scores on a single variable.
This type of question relates to descriptive research.

--- Page 177 ---
Alternatively, a researcher could relate variables rather than assess
only one. This type would be an inferential research question.
Researchers use inferential statistics to analyze the relationship (e.g.,
correlation analysis) and draws inferences about a population based
on the sample. Here is a script for a quantitative research question
focused on examining the relationship among variables:
Example 7.2 Script for a Relationship-Oriented
Quantitative Research Question and Directional
Hypothesis
_______ (name the theory) posits that _______ (explain
relationships between variables). It is thus predicted that there
will be a relationship between _______ (predictor variable)
and _______ (outcome variable), such that _______ (explain
the direction of the effect between the predictor and outcome
variable).
Example 7.3 Example of Quantitative Directional
Hypotheses
It is common to offer multiple directional hypotheses in a
single quantitative study. For example, Moore (2000) studied
the meaning of gender identity for religious and secular Jewish
and Arab women in Israeli society. Below are two hypotheses
that were tested in a national probability sample of Jewish and
Arab women:
H : Religious women with salient gender identity are less
1
socio-politically active than secular women with salient
gender identities.
H : The relationships among gender identity, religiosity,
2
and social actions are weaker among Arab women than
among Jewish women.

--- Page 178 ---
Sometimes researchers present a set of questions and
hypotheses in a single study. A model for this form of writing
quantitative research can provide a useful template for a
study.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH QUESTIONS
In a qualitative study, inquirers state research questions, not
objectives (i.e., specific goals for the research) or hypotheses (i.e.,
predictions that involve variables). These research questions assume
two forms: (a) a central question and (b) sub-questions. A central
question in qualitative research is the major open-ended question
being asked about the central phenomenon by interviewing
participants, observing settings, or reviewing documents. Qualitative
sub-questions narrow the central question by dividing the central
phenomenon into sub-topics focused on learning more about the
central phenomenon. Our recommendations for writing qualitative
questions follow.
Ask one or two central research questions. The central question
is a broad question that asks for an exploration of the central
phenomenon or concept in a study. The inquirer poses this
question, consistent with the emerging methodology of qualitative
research, as a general issue to encourage the views of
participants. To arrive at this question, ask, “What is the
broadest question that I can ask in my study?” Beginning
researchers trained in quantitative research might struggle with
this approach. They are accustomed to reverse thinking.
Quantitative research comprises narrowing the research
questions to a few, specific variables. In qualitative research, the
intent is to explore the general, complex set of factors
surrounding the central phenomenon and present the broad,
varied perspectives or meanings that participants hold.
Ask no more than five to seven sub-questions in addition to
your central question(s). Several sub-questions follow the central
question; they narrow the focus of the study but leave open the
questioning. This approach is well within the limits set by Miles

--- Page 179 ---
and Huberman (1994), who recommended that researchers write
no more than a dozen qualitative research questions in all
(central and sub-questions). The sub-questions, in turn, become
specific questions used in data collection, such as during
interviews (or in observing or when looking at documents). In
developing an interview protocol or guide, the researcher might
ask an icebreaker question at the beginning, for example,
followed by five or so sub-questions in the study (see Chapter
9). The interview would then end with an additional wrap-up or
summary question or by asking, “Who should I turn to, to learn
more about this topic?” (Asmussen & Creswell, 1995).
Relate the central question to the specific qualitative approach.
For example, the specificity of the questions in ethnography at
this stage of the design differs from that in other qualitative
approaches. In ethnographic research, Spradley (1980)
advanced a taxonomy of ethnographic questions that included a
mini-tour of the culture-sharing group, their experiences, use of
native language, contrasts with other cultural groups, and
questions to verify the accuracy of the data. In critical
ethnography, the research questions may build on a body of
existing literature. These questions become working guidelines
rather than proven truths (Thomas, 1993). Alternatively, in
phenomenology, the questions might be broadly stated without
specific reference to the existing literature or a typology of
questions. Moustakas (1994) talked about asking what the
participants experienced and what contexts or situations in which
they experienced it. A phenomenological example is: “What is it
like for a mother to live with a teenage child who is dying of
cancer?” (Nieswiadomy, 1993, p. 151). In grounded theory, the
questions may be directed toward generating a theory of some
process, such as the exploration of “how caregivers and patients
interact in a hospital setting.” In a qualitative case study, the
questions may address a description of the case and the themes
that emerge from studying it.
Begin the research questions with the words what or how to
convey an open and emerging design. The word why often
implies that the researcher is trying to explain why something
occurs, and this suggests to us probable cause-and-effect
thinking associated with quantitative research and that limits the
explanations rather than opening them up for participant views.

--- Page 180 ---
Focus on a single central phenomenon or concept. As a study
develops over time, factors will emerge that may influence this
single phenomenon. Begin a study with a single focus to explore
in detail. We often ask, “What is the one single concept that you
want to explore?”
Use exploratory verbs that convey the language of emerging
design. These verbs tell the reader that the study will do the
following:
Report (or reflect) the stories (e.g., narrative research)
Describe the essence of the experience (e.g.,
phenomenology)
Discover or generate a theory (e.g., grounded theory)
Seek to understand a culture sharing group (e.g.,
ethnography)
Explore a process of a case (e.g., case study)
Describe the themes (e.g., descriptive analysis)
Expect the research questions to evolve and change during the
study. Often in qualitative studies, the questions are under
continual review and reformulation (as in a grounded theory
study). This approach may be problematic for individuals
accustomed to quantitative designs in which the research
questions remain fixed and never change throughout the study.
Use open-ended questions without reference to the literature or
theory unless otherwise indicated by a qualitative approach.
Specify the participants and the research site for the study if the
information has not yet been given.
Here is a typical script for a qualitative central question:

--- Page 181 ---
________ (How or what?) is the ________ (central
phenomenon) for, ________ (participants) at ________
(research site).
Examples 7.4 and 7.5 illustrate qualitative research questions drawn
from several types of approaches. The central questions all begin
with the words how or what and create broad, open-ended questions
to gather participant views.
Example 7.4 A Qualitative Central Question in an
Ethnography
Mac an Ghaill and Haywood (2015) researched the changing
cultural conditions inhabited by a group of British-born,
working-class Pakistani and Bangladeshi young men over a 3-
year period. They did not specifically construct a research
question, but we would suggest it as follows:
What are the core beliefs related to ethnicity,
religion, and cultural belonging of the group of British-
born, working-class Pakistani and Bangladeshi young
men over a 3-year time period, and how do the
young men construct and understand their
geographically specific experiences of family,
schooling, and social life as well as growing up and
interacting within their local community in a rapidly
changing Britain?
This question would have begun with “what,” and it would
single out the central phenomenon—core beliefs—for the
young men. The young men are the participants in the study,
and as an ethnography, the study clearly attempts to examine
the cultural beliefs of these young Pakistani and Bangladeshi
men. Further, from the question, we can see that the study is
situated in Britain.

--- Page 182 ---
Example 7.5 Qualitative Central Questions in a Case
Study
Hernandez et al. (2020) evaluated an intergenerational
playgroup at a residential aged care setting. This playgroup
created opportunities for children to develop their skills,
parents to have a local peer support network, and older adults
to experience less isolation and more community interaction.
The authors asked one central question:
How do participants engage in an intergenerational
playgroup (IGP) within the context of a residential
aged care facility (RACF)?
This central question appears to be broad, and it begins with
the word “how.” The central phenomenon is engagement, and
the participants are individuals needing aged care in a
residential facility. This study illustrates a single case analysis
of one residential facility. The analysis in the study led to
themes of learning from each other, appreciating experience in
the moment, and connecting through play.
Example 7.6 Qualitative Sub-Questions
Sub-questions serve to sub-divide the central question’s
phenomenon in narrower questions. Often these sub-
questions become the key questions in interviews or
observations (Creswell & Bàez, 2020). An example from
Creswell and Bàez takes the central phenomenon of diversity
and looks at it from the perspective of the entire campus and
classes and with personnel (administration, campus police).
Central question: What is the campus climate toward
diversity?

--- Page 183 ---
Sub-questions:
1. What are students’ attitudes on campus toward forming
diverse social groups?
2. How is diversity encouraged by the central
administration?
3. How is diversity encouraged in the undergraduate classes
on campus?
4. How is diversity encouraged by the campus police force?
MIXED METHODS RESEARCH
QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES
The key to understanding mixed methods questions lies in stating
quantitative questions or hypotheses, qualitative questions, and a
mixed methods question. The questioning in a mixed methods study
would ideally advance three questions around each of the three
strands or components. This configuration is necessary because
mixed methods does not rely exclusively on either qualitative or
quantitative research but on both forms of inquiry.
A mixed methods question is a new type of question not found in
current research methods books. However, discussion of it exist in
the mixed methods literature, and these conversations emerged
largely through an editorial published in 2007 (Tashakkori & Creswell,
2007). The mixed methods question addresses what the
researcher hopes to learn with the combination (integration) of the
quantitative and qualitative data.
On writing questions into a mixed methods study, consider the
following:
Both qualitative and quantitative research questions (or
hypotheses) need to be advanced in a mixed methods study to
narrow and focus the purpose statement. Before the two
databases can be integrated or combined, they need to be
analyzed separately in response to questions (or hypotheses).
These questions or hypotheses can be advanced at the

--- Page 184 ---
beginning or emerge during a later phase of the research. For
example, if the study begins with a quantitative phase, the
investigator might introduce hypotheses. Later in the study, when
the qualitative phase is addressed, the qualitative research
questions appear. When writing these questions or hypotheses,
follow the guidelines in this chapter for scripting good quantitative
questions or hypotheses and qualitative questions.
In addition to quantitative questions or hypotheses and qualitative
questions, include a mixed methods research question that
directly addresses what the researcher hopes to learn from
combining or integrating the quantitative and qualitative strands
of the research. Creswell and Plano Clark (2018) have provided
numerous examples of mixed methods questions tailored to each
type of design. The intent of this question may be difficult for
writers to understand, and they may question its value, especially
if they do not understand connecting or integrating the data.
Typically, research questions focus on the content of the study’s
subject, not on the methods. However, a mixed methods question
is a methods question, and a question asking about the learning
from integration. Integration is a central component of mixed
methods.
Consider the placement of the questions in a mixed methods
study. In journal articles we see them stated in the concluding
introduction section. In a proposal, they may be included in a
separate section. Often they will follow immediately the purpose
of the study or a study aim and serve to narrow the purpose or
aim to be answered in the study.
Some attention should be given to the order of the research
questions and hypotheses. The order will reflect the sequence of
the steps in the mixed methods design used (see Chapter 10). In
a single-phase mixed methods project (a convergent design) in
which the quantitative and qualitative results are merged, either
the quantitative or the qualitative questions can be posed first. In
a two-phase project (an explanatory sequential design), the first-
phase quantitative questions or hypotheses would come first,
followed by the second-phase qualitative questions. In a three-
phase project (an exploratory sequential design), the first-phase
qualitative component comprises qualitative questions. The
second phase quantitative assessment will involve quantitative
questions or hypotheses, and the final quantitative test will also

--- Page 185 ---
include questions or hypotheses. These different types of phased
projects will be discussed later in Chapter 10 as specific types of
mixed methods research designs.
We have already provided scripts for writing the quantitative and
qualitative questions. Here is a general script for writing a mixed
methods question. This question contains two components—the intent
of integration and the procedures of integration:
The mixed methods question in the study purpose or intent
will be to ________ (compare, explain, build, augment) the
________ (quantitative data or qualitative data or
process/framework) with ________ (quantitative data or
qualitative data) by using a ________ (design: convergent
design, explanatory sequential design, exploratory
sequential design, embedded design) with the procedure of
________ (merging, connecting, or embedding).
The examples to follow illustrate different ways to incorporate the
questions into a mixed methods study. The first provides a good
example of an objective statement that reflects quantitative,
qualitative, and mixed methods questions. The second illustrates the
inclusion of quantitative and qualitative questions.
Example 7.7 Statement of Objectives in a Mixed
Methods Study
Moseholm et al. (2017) provided an excellent mixed methods
study in the health sciences.
They focused on the diagnostic evaluation of patients
presenting to providers non-specific symptoms possibly
attributed to cancer. They examined how health-related quality
of life changed during the diagnostic evaluation process
quantitatively and the experiences of the patients with quality
of life qualitatively. They then merged findings from both
databases in a convergent design to have a comprehensive

--- Page 186 ---
understanding of quality of life during the stressful life event of
possibly having cancer. Their questions were incorporated in a
passage they called a “purpose” of the research (we added
the type of question into their statements):
to measure changes in HRQol (Health-Related Quality of
Life) during the diagnostic evaluation of patients
presenting with non-specific symptoms possibly
attributable to cancer (quantitative statement);
to describe their experiences of HRQol (the qualitative
statement); and
to merge these findings with the intent to obtain a more
comprehensive understanding of HRQol experiences
during this stressful life event (p. 994) (the mixed
methods statement).
These objectives reflect quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods
statements consistent with our recommendation. They represent
objective statements rather than questions, and the authors prefaced
them with the “purpose” statement rather than calling them objectives
or questions. We recognize that authors typically write a purpose but
not specific research questions. However, we saw the “objectives” in
the purpose statement as equivalent to the research questions. This
passage appeared in the final section of the introduction. It models a
good three-part statement for objectives in a mixed methods project.
Example 7.8 Research Questions in a Mixed
Methods Study
DeCoito and Estaiteyeh (2022) focused their study on
science/STEM teachers’ experiences with online teaching and
learning in a Canadian province. They explored curriculum
planning quantitatively and assessment strategies both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Their intent was to combine the
results of both databases. They further examined the impact

--- Page 187 ---
of online teaching on student outcomes (student engagement,
student–teacher engagement, and student achievement). The
research questions were (we added the type of question into
the questions):
1. What digital tools and resources were teachers using in
an online environment? (a descriptive, quantitative
question)
2. What strategies did teachers’ online curriculum
development and implementation embrace? (a
descriptive, quantitative question)
3. What models of student assessment did the teachers
implement online? (a descriptive, quantitative question
supported by participants’ qualitative experiences—a
mixed methods question)
4. What were the impacts of online teaching on students’
outcomes as observed by teachers? (p. 2) (a quantitative
question)
This is a rigorous mixed methods study. The research questions do
not reflect clearly the qualitative questions or the mixed methods
question. However, in examining the results section of the study, we
find that the researchers’ results to questions 1 and 2 indicate
quantitative frequencies questions. In discussing the results to
question 3 on models of assessment, the authors first indicated
quantitative frequency about modes of assessment. Then, they
discussed the qualitative interview data in which teachers reflected on
their assessment practices and the conditions necessary for effective
assessment. Question 4 addressed quantitatively the factors that
affect online teaching. In sum, the authors might have provided a
clearer qualitative question and a mixed methods question and
labeled them. They might have highlighted their intent to combine the
qualitative reflective data and the quantitative assessment of
frequency of modes of assessment in a mixed methods design.
Summary
Research questions and hypotheses narrow the purpose
statement and become major signposts for readers.

--- Page 188 ---
Quantitative researchers lead with research questions and
formal hypotheses. These forms include variables that are
described, related, or compared with the
independent/predictor and dependent/outcome variables.
These questions or hypotheses include wording such as
relationship, predictions, comparison, correlation, or
determinants. Hypotheses are predictions about the outcomes
of the results, and they are written commonly in the form of a
directional alternative hypothesis.
Qualitative researchers ask at least one central question and
several sub-questions. They begin the questions with words
such as how or what and use exploratory verbs, such as
explore, understand, or discover. They pose broad, general
questions to allow the participants to explain their ideas. They
also focus initially on one central phenomenon of interest. The
questions may also mention the participants and the site for
the research. Sub-questions narrow the central question and
sub-divide it into specific topics for study.
We encourage mixed methods researchers to write
quantitative, qualitative, and a mixed methods question into
their studies. Mixed methods questions are new and may not
be understood by readers. By adding a mixed methods
question, the researcher conveys the importance of integrating
or combining the quantitative and qualitative elements. An
ideal format would be to write the three types of questions
into separate sections, such as the quantitative questions or
hypotheses, the qualitative questions, and the mixed methods
question.
KEY TERMS
Alternative hypothesis 144
Central question 146
Directional alternative hypothesis 144

--- Page 189 ---
Mixed methods question 150
Null hypothesis 144
Qualitative sub-questions 146
Quantitative hypotheses 144
Quantitative research questions 144
WRITING EXERCISES
1. For a qualitative study, write a central question followed
by five to seven sub-questions.
2. For a quantitative study, describe a published theory in
your field, and write two directional hypotheses that
challenge or extend the theory.
3. Write a mixed methods research question. Assume that
your study involves collecting both qualitative and
quantitative data. Answer these questions: Why are you
collecting both quantitative and qualitative data? What do
you hope to learn by combining the two databases?
Additional Readings
Creswell, J. W., & Gutterman, T. C. (2018). Educational
research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative
and qualitative research (6th ed.). Pearson Education.
It is important to distinguish among the purpose, the
questions, and data collection. Creswell and Guetterman
introduce writing quantitative hypotheses and research
questions, and qualitative research questions in this
introductory text on educational research. They distinguish
among purpose statements, research questions, hypotheses,

--- Page 190 ---
and objectives. They further review why these statements are
important and then convey the writing structure for questions
and hypotheses using many examples from the literature.
Morse, J. M. (1994). Designing funded qualitative research. In
N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative
research (pp. 220–235). SAGE.
Questions in a qualitative component of a mixed methods
study will differ depending on the type of qualitative approach.
Janice Morse, a nursing researcher, identifies and describes
the major design issues involved in planning a qualitative
project. She compares several strategies of inquiry and maps
the type of research questions used in each. For
phenomenology and ethnography, the research calls for
meaning and descriptive questions. For grounded theory, the
questions need to address process, whereas in
ethnomethodology and discourse analysis, the questions
relate to verbal interaction and dialogue. She indicates that the
wording of the research question determines the focus and
scope of the study.
Tashakkori, A., & Creswell, J. W. (2007). Exploring the nature
of research questions in mixed methods research [Editorial].
Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(3), 207–211.
This editorial represents the first major discussion of the
importance of a mixed methods question. This editorial by
Abbas Tashakkori and John Creswell addresses the use and
nature of research questions in mixed methods research. It
highlights the importance of research questions in the process
of research and identifies the need for a better understanding
of the use of mixed methods questions. It asks, “How does
one frame a research question in a mixed methods study?” (p.
207). Three models are presented: (a) writing separate
quantitative and qualitative questions, (b) writing an
overarching mixed methods question, or (c) writing research
questions for each phase of a study as the research evolves.
Plano Clark, V. L., & Badiee, M. (2010). Research questions
in mixed methods research. In A. Tashakkori & C. Teddlie
(Eds.), SAGE handbook of mixed methods in the social &
behavioral sciences (2nd ed., pp. 275–304). SAGE.

--- Page 191 ---
It is important to write a mixed methods question. The chapter
by Vicki Plano Clark and Manijeh Badiee notes that little
discussion had occurred about mixed methods questions.
Their chapter advances a model for research questions in
mixed methods research of practical value. They say that
research questions represent the hub of the research
process, and they connect the literature with the methods.
Their model for writing mixed methods questions includes
considering the personal fit of the questions with the
researcher, the researcher’s community of practice, and the
connection between the literature and methods.

--- Page 192 ---
CHAPTER 8 QUANTITATIVE METHODS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify the four primary elements in a quantitative method section.
2. Describe the difference between a survey design and an experimental design.
3. Identify the elements that go into writing a good survey research method plan.
4. Identify the elements that go into writing a good experimental research method plan.
INTRODUCTION
We turn from the introduction, purpose, and hypotheses to the method section of a proposal. This
chapter presents essential steps in designing quantitative methods for a research proposal or study, with
focus on survey and experimental designs. These designs reflect postpositivist philosophical assumptions,
as discussed in Chapter 1. For example, determinism suggests that examining the relationships between
and among variables is central to answering questions and hypotheses through surveys and experiments.
In one case, a researcher might evaluate whether playing violent video games is associated with higher
rates of playground aggression in kids, which is a correlational hypothesis that could be evaluated in a
survey design. In another case, a researcher might be interested in evaluating whether violent video
game playing causes aggressive behavior, which is a causal hypothesis best evaluated by a true
experiment. In each case, these quantitative approaches focus on carefully measuring (or experimentally
manipulating) a small set of variables to answer theory-guided research questions and hypotheses. This
chapter focuses on the essential components of a method section in proposals for a survey or
experimental study.
PUTTING QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
Planning and writing a quantitative method section has a formal structure and intended audience. The
structure of the method section has four primary elements: (a) a description of the study population and
the sample characteristics (i.e., who are you studying?), (b) a description of the study procedures and
variables (i.e., how will you formally test your study hypotheses?), (c) a description of the instruments
used (i.e., how will you measure your variables?), and (d) a description of the data analytic plan (i.e.,
how will you analyze your data?). The intended audience of a quantitative method section is other
scientists, and the method section should provide sufficient detail that these other scientists could carry
out the same study in their own research setting. This chapter focuses on approaches for drafting a
method section plan and writeup by describing two popular quantitative designs (survey design and
experimental design) and, in each case, the practical decisions around defining the study sample
participants, the variables of interest, study instruments, and intended data analyses. Quantitative
methods are a helpful tool for testing formal hypotheses, and the end of each survey and experimental
design section offers some discussion of how to interpret and write up research results.
QUANTITATIVE DESIGNS
A survey design provides a quantitative description of trends, attitudes, and opinions of a population, or
tests for associations among variables of a population, by studying a sample of that population. Survey
designs help researchers answer three types of questions:
(a) descriptive questions (e.g., What percentage of company employees support hiring women
of color in executive leadership positions?); (b) questions about the relationships between
variables (e.g., is there an association between the number of women of color in executive roles
and overall perceptions of company satisfaction among employees?); or in cases where a
survey design is repeated over time in a longitudinal study, (c) questions about predictive

--- Page 193 ---
relationships between variables over time (e.g., Does Time 1 hiring of new women of color
executives predict greater Time 2 company satisfaction?).
An experimental design systematically manipulates one or more variables to evaluate how this
manipulation affects an outcome (or outcomes) of interest. Importantly, an experiment isolates the effects
of this manipulation by holding all other variables constant. When one group receives a treatment and the
other group does not (which is a manipulated variable of interest), the experimenter can isolate whether
the treatment and not other factors influence the outcome. For example, a sample of nurses could be
randomly assigned to a 3-week expressive writing program (where they write about their deepest
thoughts and feelings) or a matched 3-week control writing program (writing about the facts of their daily
morning routine). This experiment evaluates whether this expressive writing manipulation reduces job
burnout in the months following the program (i.e., the writing condition is the manipulated (independent)
variable of interest, and job burnout is the (dependent) outcome variable of interest).
There are relative advantages and disadvantages in selecting a survey versus experimental design.
Surveys can be relatively inexpensive and easy to administer in contrast to experimental studies where a
researcher aims to systematically manipulate a variable (or variables) while holding all other variables
constant. Survey designs offer a tool for describing a study population and testing for associations
between study variables. But experiments can go beyond these survey design features to address causal
relationships. In the nurse experiment example here, manipulating expressive writing (and keeping all
other variables constant) permits inferences around whether writing about one’s deepest thoughts and
feelings causes less burnout in the months following the intervention. Whether a quantitative study
employs a survey or experimental design, both approaches share a common goal of helping the
researcher make inferences about relationships among variables and generalize the sample results to a
broader population of interest (e.g., all nurses in the community).
COMPONENTS OF A SURVEY STUDY METHOD PLAN
The design of a survey method plan follows a standard format. Numerous examples of this format appear
in scholarly journals, and these examples provide useful models. The following sections detail typical
components. In preparing to design these components into a proposal, consider the questions on the
checklist shown in Table 8.1 as a general guide.
Table 8.1 A Checklist of Questions for Designing a Survey Study Plan

--- Page 194 ---
______ Is the purpose of a survey design stated?
______ What type of design will be used, and what are the reasons for choosing the design
mentioned?
______ Is the nature of the survey (cross-sectional vs. longitudinal) identified?
______ Is the population and its size mentioned?
______ Will the population be stratified? If so, how?
______ How many people will be in the sample? On what basis was this size chosen?

--- Page 195 ---
______ What will be the procedure for sampling these individuals (e.g., random, nonrandom,
convenience)?
______ What instruments will be used in the survey? For each instrument, describe the following:
who developed it, how many items does it contain, does it have acceptable score reliability
and validity, and what are the scale anchors?
(a) What is the source publication and citation for who developed the instrument?
______
(b) How many items does the instrument contain, what is the scale range (e.g., Likert Scale
______ from 1–5), and what are the scale anchors (e.g., not at all to very much)?
(c) Does the instrument have acceptable validity (construct and criterion validity) and reliability
______ (internal consistency)?
(d) How is the instrument scored and converted into variables?
______
(e) How will the variables be used to test your research questions?
______
______ What procedure will be used to pilot or field-test the survey?
______ What is the timeline for administering the survey?
______ What ethical considerations will be considered for protecting participants? What steps will
be taken to get IRB approval of the study plan?
What specific steps will be taken in data analysis to do the following:
(a) Analyze returns?
______
(b) Check for response bias?
______
(c) Conduct a descriptive analysis?
______
(d) Combine items into scales?
______
(e) Check for reliability of scales? Check for validity?
______

--- Page 196 ---
(f) Run inferential statistics to answer the research questions or assess practical implications
______ of the results?
______ How will the results be interpreted?
THE SURVEY DESIGN
The first parts of the survey method plan section introduce readers to the basic purpose and rationale for
survey research. Begin the section by describing the rationale for the design. Specifically:
The Purpose
The primary purpose is to answer a question (or questions) about variables of interest. A sample purpose
statement could read: “The primary purpose of this survey study is to empirically evaluate whether the
number of overtime hours worked predicts higher subsequent burnout symptoms in a sample of
emergency room nurses.”
Rationale for Using the Survey Method
Indicate why a survey method is the preferred type of approach for this study. In this rationale, it can be
beneficial to acknowledge the advantages of survey designs, such as the economy of the design, rapid
turnaround in data collection, and constraints that preclude you from pursuing other designs (e.g., “An
experimental design was not adopted to look at the relationship between overtime hours worked and
burnout symptoms because it would be prohibitively difficult, and potentially unethical, to randomly assign
nurses to work different amounts of overtime hours.”).
Type of Survey Method
Indicate whether the survey will be cross-sectional—with the data collected at one point in time—or
whether it will be longitudinal—with data collected over time.
Specify the Form of Data Collection
Fowler (2014) identified the following types: mail, telephone, the internet, personal interviews, or group
administration (see Fink, 2016; Krueger & Casey, 2014). Using an internet survey and administering it
online has been discussed extensively in the literature. (Nesbary, 2000; Sue & Ritter, 2012). There has
been significant growth and popularity of internet survey tools that offer helpful survey building features
and provide ready access to participant populations across the world (e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk,
Prolific) (Buhrmester et al., 2018). Regardless of the form of data collection, provide a rationale for the
procedure, using arguments based on its strengths and weaknesses, costs, data availability, and
convenience.
The Population and Sample
Survey designs often rely on drawing a sample of participants from a broader population. A study
population refers to all people you aim to make inferences about (e.g., all nurses across the world)
whereas a study sample refers to the (sub)group of participants examined in the survey study (e.g.,
nurses drawn from five hospitals in your city). Ideally, sampling of participants is done in such a way as to
minimize sources of bias and permit inferences about the study population of interest. Methodologists
have written excellent discussions about the underlying logic of sampling theory (e.g., Babbie, 2015;
Fowler, 2014). Here are essential aspects of the population and sample to describe in a research plan.

--- Page 197 ---
The Population
Identify the population in the study. Also state the size of this population, if size can be determined, and
the means of identifying individuals in the population. Questions of access arise here, and the researcher
might refer to availability of sampling frames—mail or published lists—of potential respondents in the
population. In most cases it is impractical to include all people in a population (e.g., all nurses across the
world), and it is important to carefully consider optimal sampling approaches.
Sampling Design
Identify whether the sampling design for this population is single stage or multistage (called clustering).
Cluster sampling is ideal when it is impossible or impractical to compile a list of the population’s elements
(Babbie, 2015). A single-stage sampling procedure is one in which the researcher has access to names
in the population and can sample the people (or other elements) directly. In a multistage or clustering
procedure, the researcher first identifies clusters (groups or organizations), obtains names of individuals
within those clusters, and then samples within them.
Type of Sampling
Identify and discuss the selection process for participants in your sample. Ideally aim to draw a random
sample, in which each individual in the population has an equal probability of being selected (a systematic
or probabilistic sample). But in many cases it may be difficult (or impossible) to get a random sample of
participants.
Alternatively, a systematic sample can have precision-equivalent random sampling (Fowler, 2014). In
this approach, you choose a random start on a list and select every X-numbered person on the list. The X
number is based on a fraction determined by the number of people on the list and the number selected on
the list (e.g., 1 out of every 80 people). Finally, less desirable, but often used, is a nonprobability sample
(or convenience sample), in which respondents are chosen based on their convenience and availability.
Population Stratification
Identify whether the study will involve stratification of the population before selecting the sample. This
requires that characteristics of the population members be known so that the population can be stratified
first before selecting the sample (Fowler, 2014). Stratification means that specific characteristics of
individuals (e.g., gender—females and males) are represented in the sample and the sample reflects the
true proportion in the population of individuals with certain characteristics. When randomly selecting
people from a population, these characteristics may or may not be present in the sample in the same
proportions as in the population, and stratification ensures their representation. Also identify the
characteristics used in stratifying the population (e.g., gender, income levels, education). Within each
stratum, identify whether the sample contains individuals with the characteristic in the same proportion as
it appears in the entire population.
Sample Size Determination
Indicate the number of people in the sample and the procedures used to compute this number. Sample
size determination is at its core a trade-off: A larger sample will provide more precision, but recruiting
more participants is time-consuming and costly. In survey research, investigators sometimes choose a
sample size based on selecting a fraction of the population (say, 10%) or selecting a sample size
typically based on past studies. These approaches are not optimal; instead sample size determination
should be based on your analysis plans and expected outcomes (Fowler, 2014).
Power Analysis

--- Page 198 ---
If your analysis plan comprises detecting a significant association between variables of interest, a power
analysis can help you estimate a target sample size. Many free online and commercially available power
analysis calculators are available (e.g., G*Power; Faul et al., 2007; Faul et al., 2009). The input values
for a formal power analysis will depend on the questions you aim to address in your survey design study
(for a helpful resource, see Kraemer & Blasey, 2016). This power analysis for sample size determination
should be done during study planning and prior to enrolling any participants. Many scientific journals now
require researchers to report a power analysis for sample size determination in the Method section.
Instrumentation
As part of rigorous data collection, the method proposal also provides detailed information about the
actual survey instruments to be used in the study. Consider the following:
The Survey Instruments Used to Collect Data
Discuss whether you used an instrument designed for this research, a modified instrument, or an
instrument developed by someone else. For example, if you aim to measure perceptions of stress over
the last month, you could use the 10-item Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; Cohen et al., 1983) as the
stress perceptions instrument in the survey design. Many survey instruments, including the PSS, can be
acquired and used free for research purposes as long as you cite the original source of the instrument. In
some cases, researchers have made the use of their instruments proprietary, requiring a fee for use.
Instruments are increasingly being delivered through a multitude of online survey products now available
(e.g., Qualtrics, Survey Monkey). Although these products can be costly, they also can be helpful for
accelerating and improving the survey research process. For example, researchers can create their
surveys quickly using custom templates and post them on websites or e-mail them to participants to
complete. These software programs facilitate data collection into organized spreadsheets for data
analysis, reducing data entry errors and accelerating research question and hypothesis testing.
Instruments and Measures
Instruments are the devices for collecting measures of variables. Much like a thermometer is an
instrument for collecting measures of body temperature, a questionnaire can be an instrument for
collecting measures of your target variable of interest (e.g., burnout symptoms). In the social and
behavioral sciences, a measure commonly refers to some characteristic of study participants.
Validity of Scores Using the Instrument
To use an existing instrument, describe the established validity of scores obtained from past use of the
instrument. This means reporting efforts by authors to establish validity in quantitative research—
whether you can draw accurate inferences from scores on the instruments. Although there are many
forms of validity in survey research, two common forms are (a) construct validity (Does the survey
instrument accurately measure the hypothetical construct or concept it was intended to measure?), and
(b) concurrent or criterion validity (Does the survey instrument associate with other gold-standard
measures of the construct or predict a criterion measure?). Commonly, researchers focus on establishing
these forms of validity during initial survey measure development, and they report these findings in the
first scientific reports describing the instruments. Establishing the validity of an instrument helps
researchers identify whether an instrument might be a good one to use in survey research. These forms
of validity (construct, concurrent, criterion) are distinct from identifying the threats to validity in
experimental research, as discussed later in this chapter.
Reliability of Scores on the Instrument
Also mention whether scores resulting from past use of the instrument demonstrate acceptable
reliability. Reliability in this context refers to the consistency or repeatability of an instrument. The most
important form of reliability for multi-item instruments is the instrument’s internal consistency—the degree
to which sets of items on an instrument behave in the same way. This is important because instrument

--- Page 199 ---
scale items should be assessing the same underlying construct, so these items should have suitable
intercorrelations. A scale’s internal consistency is quantified by a Cronbach’s alpha (α) value that ranges
between 0 and 1, with optimal values ranging between .7 and .9. For example, the 10-item PSS has
excellent internal consistency across many published reports, with the original source publication
reporting internal consistency values of α = .84–.86 in three studies (Cohen et al., 1983). It can also be
helpful to evaluate a second form of instrument reliability, its test–retest reliability. This form of reliability
concerns whether the scale is reasonably stable over time with repeated administrations (e.g., is there a
comparable score on the PSS taken by a group of participants at time 1 and then one month later?).
When you modify an instrument or combine instruments in a study, the original validity and reliability may
not hold for the new instrument, and it becomes important to establish validity and reliability as a
component of the data analysis plan.
Inter-Rater Reliability
Although survey designs typically focus on establishing reliability across items within a single instrument
(internal consistency), some study designs may involve judges or experts who all complete the same
instrument. For example, a researcher may be interested in bullying behaviors and ask expert judges to
make ratings after viewing a video recording of children interacting on a playground. Inter-rater reliability
in these studies is an important form of reliability to establish and refers to the degree to which different
independent judges agree in their ratings.
Sample Items
Include sample items from the instrument so that readers can see the actual items used. In an appendix
to the proposal, attach sample items or the entire instrument (or instruments) used.
Content of an Instrument
Indicate the major content sections in the instrument, such as the cover letter (Dillman, 2007, provides a
useful list of items to include in cover letters), the items (e.g., demographics, attitudinal items, behavioral
items, factual items), and the closing instructions. Also mention the type of scales used to measure the
items on the instrument, such as continuous scales (e.g., strongly agree to strongly disagree) and
categorical scales (e.g., yes/no, rank from highest to lowest importance).
Pilot Testing
Discuss plans for pilot testing or field-testing the survey, and provide a rationale for these plans. This
testing is important for evaluating the appropriateness of the instrument for the study sample, for
evaluating the internal consistency of items, and to improve or modify questions, format, and instructions.
Pilot testing all study materials also allows assessing how long the study will take (and identify potential
concerns with participant fatigue). Indicate the number of people who will test the instrument and the
plans to incorporate their comments into final instrument revisions.
Administering the Survey
For a mailed survey, identify steps for administering the survey and for following up to ensure a high
response rate. Salant and Dillman (1994) suggested a four-phase administration process (see Dillman,
2007, for a similar three-phase process). The first mail-out is a short advance-notice letter to all
members of the sample, and the second mail-out is the actual mail survey, distributed about 1 week after
the advance-notice letter. The third mail-out comprises a postcard follow-up sent to all members of the
sample 4 to 8 days after the initial questionnaire. The fourth mail-out, sent to all nonrespondents,
comprises a personalized cover letter with a handwritten signature, the questionnaire, and a
preaddressed return envelope with postage. Researchers send this fourth mail-out 3 weeks after the
second mail-out. Thus, in total, the researcher concludes the administration period 4 weeks after its start,
providing the returns meet project objectives.

--- Page 200 ---
Variables in the Study
Although readers of a proposal are first introduced to the study variables in the purpose statement and
hypotheses, it is useful in the method section to directly state the variable names, operational definitions,
and actual instruments used to measure those variables. One technique in the method plan is to create a
table that links the variable name, a description or operational definition of that variable, and the items on
an instrument to measure that variable. In cases where variables are drawn from previously validated
survey instruments, include a citation for the original source document. Creating this table is especially
helpful in survey studies where investigators have many variables of interest. Table 8.2 illustrates such a
table using hypothetical data for a method plan that tests the hypothesis that there is a positive
association between greater numbers of scientific publications during graduate school being associated
with procuring a greater number of grants as a new faculty member and whether this association persists
even when controlling for life stressors.
Table 8.2 Variables, Definitions, and Their Corresponding Items on a Survey
Variable Name Variable Definition Instrument Items
Prior publications (Predictor Total number of Sum across questions 11, 12, 13, 14, and
Variable) publications that a faculty 15: publication counts for journal articles,
member produced prior books, conference papers, book chapters
to receipt of the published before receiving the doctorate
doctorate
Grants funded (Outcome Total number of grants Sum across questions 16, 17, and 18: 7-
Variable) that the faculty member year total of grants from foundations,
received in the first 7 federal grants, state grants
years of their faculty
appointment

--- Page 201 ---
Variable Name Variable Definition Instrument Items
Life event stress (Control Total life event stress Sum the total impact scores across the 43
Variable) over the first 7 years of scale items
their faculty appointment
Measure adapted to focus on
7-year time window using the
43-item Social Readjustment
Scale (Holmes & Rahe, 1967)
Data Analysis
A method plan carefully outlines the plans for quantitative data processing and analysis. In the proposal,
present information about the steps and tools used to enter, process, and analyze the data. Many high-
quality computer software platforms are available for quantitative data entry, analysis, and data
visualization. For new researchers there are many popular books covering how to work with these
software tools. Some of the more popular computer software programs are the following:
R: The R Project for Statistical Computing (www.r-project.org).
R and the RStudio® tool (now renamed Posit™) is a free and widely used platform for statistical
computing and graphics. It requires beginning researchers to commit significant time to learning
the R computing language but offers significant range and customization of data analysis and
graphic visualization.
IBM© SPSS© Statistics 28 for Windows and Mac (www.spss.com). SPSS is a popular commercial
statistical package that is easy to use but requires users to pay a licensing fee. Academically
affiliated researchers (and graduate student trainees) can obtain SPSS at discounted rates.
Microsoft Excel® (www.microsoft.com). Although many people are familiar with Excel as a
spreadsheet manager, Excel also has a wide range of tools for data manipulation and analysis.
(Google sheets is another spreadsheet statistical analysis tool available from Google, and it is free.)
JMP® (www.jmp.com). This is a statistical analysis platform from SAS.
Minitab® Statistical Software (minitab.com). This is an interactive software statistical package
available from Minitab Inc.
SYSTAT 13® (systatsoftware.com). This is a comprehensive interactive statistical package available
from Systat Software, Inc.
SAS/STAT® (sas.com). This is a statistical program with tools as an integral component of the SAS
system of products available from SAS Institute, Inc.
Stata®, release 17 (stata.com). This is a data analysis and statistics program available from
StataCorp.
The data analysis plan describes the sequential series of steps for analyzing the survey data:
Step 1. Report information about the number of participants in the sample who did and did not return the
survey. A table with numbers and percentages describing respondents and nonrespondents is a useful
tool to present this information.

--- Page 202 ---
Step 2. Discuss the method by which response bias will be determined. Response bias is the effect of
nonresponses on survey estimates (Fowler, 2014). Bias means that if nonrespondents had responded,
their responses would have substantially changed the overall results. Mention the procedures used to
check for response bias, such as wave analysis or a respondent/nonrespondent analysis. In wave
analysis, the researcher examines returns on select items week by week to determine if average
responses change (Leslie, 1972). Based on the assumption that those who return surveys in the final
weeks of the response period are nearly all nonrespondents, if the responses begin to change, a
potential exists for response bias. An alternative check for response bias is to contact a few
nonrespondents by phone and determine if their responses differ substantially from respondents. This
constitutes a respondent/nonrespondent check for response bias.
Step 3. Discuss a plan to provide a descriptive analysis of data for all predictor and outcome variables
in the study. This analysis should indicate the means, standard deviations, and range of scores for these
variables. Identify whether there is missing data (e.g., some participants may not provide responses to
some items or whole scales), and develop plans to report how much missing data is present and
strategies to replace missing data (for a review, see Schafer & Graham, 2002).
Step 4. If the proposal contains an instrument with multi-item scales or a plan to develop scales, first
evaluate whether it will be necessary to reverse-score items and how total scale scores will be
calculated. Also mention reliability checks for the internal consistency of the scales (i.e., the Cronbach
alpha statistic).
Step 5. Identify the statistics and the statistical computer program for testing the major inferential
research questions or hypotheses in the proposed study. The inferential questions or hypotheses relate
variables or compare groups in terms of variables to draw inferences from the sample to a population.
Provide a rationale for the choice of statistical test, and mention the assumptions associated with the
statistic. As shown later in Table 8.3, base this choice on the nature of the research question (e.g.,
relating variables or comparing groups as the most popular), the number of predictor and outcome
variables, and the variables used as covariates (e.g., see Rudestam & Newton, 2014). Further, consider
whether the variables will be measured on an instrument as a continuous score (e.g., age from 18 to 36)
or as a categorical score (e.g., women = 1, men = 2). Finally, consider whether the scores from the
sample might be normally distributed in a bell-shaped curve if plotted out on a graph or non-normally
distributed. There are additional ways to determine if the scores are normally distributed (see Creswell &
Guetterman, 2018). These factors, in combination, enable a researcher to determine what statistical test
will be suited for answering the research question or hypothesis. In Table 8.3, we show how the factors,
in combination, lead to the selection of a number of common statistical tests. For additional types of
statistical tests, examine statistics methods books, such as Gravetter and Wallnau (2012).
Step 6. A final step in the data analysis is to present the results in tables or figures and interpret the
results from the statistical test.
Preregistering the Study Plan
After drafting a method plan, it is important to step back and consider whether the goal of your survey
research is exploratory and aimed at generating new hypotheses or whether the goal is confirmatory and
directed at formally testing hypotheses. If the research goal is formal hypothesis testing, it is important to
preregister the plan. Preregistration is the act of publishing your plan and hypotheses in a public registry
prior to data collection. Preregistration is quickly becoming an essential tool for improving the accuracy
and transparency of quantitative research (for a review, see Nosek et al., 2018). Two popular public
registries for preregistering studies are the Center for Open Science (www.cos.io/initiatives/prereg) or
the trials registry maintained by the United States Library of Medicine at the National Institutes of Health
(www.clinicaltrials.gov). Each of these registries provides preregistration templates and guidance for
researchers and ways to search their databases for studies like your own. Often similar study
preregistrations on these registries can offer new ideas for improving your own research method plan.
Interpreting Results and Writing a Discussion Section
After executing a method plan and carrying out the survey study, it is important to interpret the study
results and write a discussion section. An interpretation in quantitative research means that the
researcher draws conclusions from the results for the research questions, hypotheses, and the larger
meaning of the results. This interpretation involves several steps:

--- Page 203 ---
Reporting Results
Report how the results addressed the research question or hypothesis. The Publication Manual of the
American Psychological Association (American Psychological Association, 2020) suggests that the most
complete meaning of the results come from reporting extensive description, statistical significance
testing, confidence intervals, and effect sizes. Thus, it is important to clarify the meaning of these last
three reports of the results. Statistical significance testing helps quantify whether a result is due only to
chance or some factor(s) of interest. The test will provide a p-value, which is the probability of observing
results as extreme as those in the study, assuming the results are truly due to chance alone. A p-value of
.05 or .01 is often considered to be statistically significant. (In common statistical significance testing
language, a statistical test is significant if the results are unlikely by chance to have occurred and the null
hypothesis of “no effect” can be rejected. The researcher sets a rejection level such as p = 0.01 and then
assesses whether the test statistic is statistically significant [less than p = 0.01].) In practice, researchers
use statistical significance testing in an affirmative way, describing whether there is a statistically
significant effect or not. For example, a result could be described as “the analysis of variance revealed a
statistically significant difference between men, women, and nonbinary participant perceptions of stress
during the COVID pandemic F(2, 497) = 8.55, p = 0.001.”
Statistical Tests in Survey Research
Survey designs often use a combination of several popular statistical test statistics to test study
hypotheses or questions (see Table 8.3). An independent samples t-test compares the means of two
independent groups (a paired samples t-test compares two measurements from the same group).
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) compares means across two or more groups. Analysis of Covariance
(ANCOVA) extends ANOVA to include control variables. In cases where the variable of interest is
categorical (such as males vs. females vs. nonbinary), the chi-squared test is used. A Pearson Product
Moment Correlation (or Pearson’s correlation for short) is a measure of the strength of association
between two variables, and multiple regression extends correlation analysis to two or more variables.
Anytime a test statistic is reported in the method plan or final report, it is italicized (e.g., t, p).
Table 8.3 Criteria for Choosing Select Statistical Tests
Number of
Number of Number of
Nature of Control Dis
Independent/Predictor Dependent/Outcome Type of Variables
Question Variables of S
Variables Variables
(covariates)

--- Page 204 ---
Number of
Number of Number of
Nature of Control Dis
Independent/Predictor Dependent/Outcome Type of Variables
Question Variables of S
Variables Variables
(covariates)
Group 1 1 0 Categorical/continuous Nor
comparison
Group 1 or more 1 0 Categorical/continuous Nor
comparison
Group 1 or more 1 1 Categorical/continuous Nor
comparison
Association 1 1 0 Categorical/categorical Non
between
groups
Relate 1 1 0 Continuous/continuous Nor
variables

--- Page 205 ---
Number of
Number of Number of
Nature of Control Dis
Independent/Predictor Dependent/Outcome Type of Variables
Question Variables of S
Variables Variables
(covariates)
Relate 2 or more 1 0 Continuous/continuous Nor
variables
Practical Evidence
In addition to the statistical test and p-value you report, two forms of practical evidence of the results
can also be reported: (a) the confidence interval and (b) the effect size. A confidence interval is a range
of values (an interval) that describes a level of uncertainty around an estimated observed score. A
confidence interval shows how good an estimated score might be. A confidence interval of 95%, for
example, indicates that if you conducted the same study over and over again, then 95 out of 100 times
you ran the study, the confidence interval would include the true population value. An effect size identifies
the strength of the conclusions about group differences or the relationships among variables in
quantitative studies. It is a descriptive statistic that is not dependent on whether the relationship in the
data represents the true population. The calculation of effect size varies for different statistical tests: it
can be used to explain the variance between two or more variables or the differences among means for
groups. It shows the practical significance of the results apart from inferences applied to the population.
Context of Previous Studies
The final step is to draft a discussion section where you restate the main findings and place them in
context of previous published studies. Here it is important to discuss the implications of the results in
terms of how they are consistent with, refute, or extend previous related studies in the scientific literature.
How do your research findings address gaps in our knowledge base on the topic? How do they extend
previous theory and research in the area? It is also important to acknowledge the implications of the
findings for practice and for future research in the area. It may also involve discussing theoretical and
practical consequences of the results. It is also helpful to briefly acknowledge potential limitations of the
study and potential alternative explanations for the study findings. The end of the discussion section (i.e.,
the last paragraph of the discussion section) then broadens the lens again to remind readers of the main
findings and their broader importance to science and society.
Components of an Experimental Study Method Plan
An experimental method plan follows a standard form: (a) participants and design, (b) procedure, and (c)
measures. These three sequential sections generally are sufficient (often in studies with a few measures,

--- Page 206 ---
the procedure and measures sections combine into a single procedure section). In this section of the
chapter, we review these components as well as information regarding key features of experimental
design and corresponding statistical analyses. As with the section on survey design, the intent here is to
highlight key topics to be addressed in an experimental method plan. An overall guide to these topics is
found by answering the questions on the checklist shown in Table 8.4.
Table 8.4 A Checklist of Questions for Designing an Experimental Study Plan
______ Who are the participants in the study?
______ How were the participants selected? Name specific study inclusion and exclusion criteria.
______ How and when will the participants be randomly assigned?
______ How many participants will be in the study?
______ What ethical considerations should be considered for protecting participants? What steps
will be taken to get IRB approval of the study plan?
______ What experimental research design will be used? What would a visual model of this design
look like?
______ What are the independent variables, and how are they operationalized?
______ What are the dependent variables (i.e., outcome variables) in the study? How will they be
measured?
______ Will variables be included as manipulation checks or covariates in the experiment? How and

--- Page 207 ---
when will they be measured?
______ What instruments will be used to measure the dependent variables (outcomes) in the study?
Why were they chosen? Who developed these measures? Do they have established validity
and reliability?
______ What are the sequential steps in the procedure for administering the experimental study to
participants?
______ What are potential threats to internal and external validity for the experimental design and
procedure? How will they be addressed?
______ How will pilot testing of materials and procedures be conducted prior to formal data
collection?
______ What statistics will be used to analyze the data (e.g., descriptive and inferential)?
______ How will the results be interpreted?
Participants
Readers need to know about the selection, assignment, and number of participants who will take part in
the experiment. Consider the following suggestions when writing the method section plan for an
experiment:
Recruiting Participants
Describe the procedures for recruiting participants to be in the study and any selection processes used.
Often investigators recruit a study sample that shares certain characteristics by formally stating specific
inclusion and exclusion study criteria when designing their study (e.g., inclusion criteria: participants must
be English language speaking and not be children under the age of 18). Recruitment approaches are
wide-ranging and can include random digit dialing of households in a community, posting study recruitment
flyers or e-mails to targeted communities, or newspaper advertisements. Describe the recruitment
approaches that will be used and the compensation to participants for their involvement.
Random Assignment
One of the principal features distinguishing an experiment from a survey study design is the use of
random assignment. Random assignment is a technique for placing participants into study conditions of a
manipulated variable of interest. When individuals are randomly assigned to groups, the procedure is
called a true experiment. If random assignment is used, discuss how and when the study will randomly
assign individuals to treatment groups. These groups in experiments are levels of an independent
variable. This means that of the pool of participants, Individual 1 goes to Group 1, Individual 2 to Group
2, and so forth so that there is no systematic bias in assigning the individuals. This procedure eliminates
the possibility of systematic differences among characteristics of the participants affecting the outcomes.
This means that any differences in outcomes can be attributed to the study’s manipulated variable (or
variables) of interest (Keppel & Wickens, 2003). Often experimental studies may be interested in
randomly assigning participants to levels of a manipulated variable of interest (e.g., a new treatment
approach for teaching fractions to children vs. the traditional approach). At the same time the study would
measure a second predictor variable of interest that cannot utilize random assignment (e.g., whether the
treatment benefits are larger among female compared to male children because it is impossible to

--- Page 208 ---
randomly assign children to be male or female). Designs in which a researcher has only partial (or no)
control over randomly assigning participants to levels of a manipulated variable of interest are called
quasi-experiments.
Power Analysis for Sample Size
Conduct and report a power analysis for sample size determination (for a helpful resource, see Kraemer
& Blasey, 2016). The procedures for a sample size power analysis mimic those for a survey design,
although the focus shifts to estimating the number of participants needed in each condition of the
experiment to detect significant group differences. In this case, the input parameters shift to include an
estimate of the effect size referencing the estimated differences between the groups of your manipulated
variable(s) of interest and the number of groups in your experiment.
Formal Design Statement
At the end of the participants section, it is helpful to provide a formal experimental design statement that
specifies the independent variables and their corresponding levels. For example, a formal design
statement might read, “The experiment consisted of a one-way two-groups design comparing burnout
symptoms between full-time and part-time nurses.”
Variables
The variables need to be specified in the formal design statement and described (in detail) in the
procedure section of the experimental method plan. Here are some suggestions for developing ideas
about variables in a proposal:
Independent Variables
Identify the independent variables in the experiment (recall the discussion of variables in Chapter 3) and
their manipulation in the study. One approach is to conduct a 2 × 2 between-subjects factorial design in
which two independent variables are manipulated in a single experiment. If this is the case, it is important
to clarify how and when each independent variable is manipulated.
Manipulation Check
If possible, include a manipulation check measure to evaluate whether your study successfully
manipulated the independent variable(s) of interest. A manipulation check measure is defined as a
measure of the intended manipulated variable of interest. For example, if a study aims to manipulate self-
esteem by offering positive test feedback (high self-esteem condition) or negative test feedback (low
self-esteem condition) using a performance task, quantitatively evaluate whether there are self-esteem
differences between these two conditions with a manipulation check measure. For example, after this
self-esteem study manipulation, a researcher may include a brief questionnaire measure of state self-
esteem as a manipulation check measure to evaluate whether the negative test feedback condition
participants indeed have lower state self-esteem relative to the participants in the positive test feedback
condition.
Dependent Variables
Identify the dependent variable or variables (i.e., the outcomes) in the experiment. The dependent
variable is the response or the criterion variable presumed to be caused by or influenced by the
independent treatment conditions; as such it is “dependent” on the independent variable manipulation.
One consideration in the experimental method plan is whether there are multiple ways to measure
outcome(s) of interest. For example, if the primary outcome is aggression, it may be possible to collect
multiple dependent measures of aggression in the experiment (e.g., a behavioral measure of aggression
in response to a provocation, self-reported perceptions of aggression).

--- Page 209 ---
Other Variables
Identify other variables to be measured in the study. Three categories of variables are worth mentioning.
First, include measures of participant demographic characteristics (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity). Second,
measure variables that may contribute noise to the study design. For example, self-esteem levels may
fluctuate during the day (and relate to the study outcome variables of interest), and so it may be
beneficial to measure and record time of day in the study (and then use it as a covariate in study
statistical analyses). Third, measure variables that may be potential confounding variables. For example,
a critic of the self-esteem manipulation may say that the positive/negative performance feedback study
manipulation also unintentionally manipulated rumination, and this rumination better explained study results
on the outcomes of interest. By measuring rumination as a potential confounding variable of interest, the
researcher can quantitatively evaluate this claim.
Instrumentation and Materials
As in a survey method plan, a sound experimental study plan calls for a thorough discussion about the
instruments used—their development, items, scales, and reports of reliability and validity of scores on
past uses. However, an experimental study plan also describes in detail the approach for manipulating the
independent variables of interest.
Materials
Thoroughly discuss the materials used for the manipulated variable(s) of interest. One group, for
example, may participate in a special computer-assisted learning plan used by a teacher in a classroom.
This plan might involve handouts, lessons, and special written instructions to help students in this
experimental group learn how to study a subject using computers. A pilot test of these materials may also
be discussed in addition to any training required to administer the materials in a standardized way.
Cover Story
Often the researcher does not want participants to know what variables are being manipulated or the
condition they have been assigned to (and sometimes what the primary outcome measures of interest
are). It is important, then, to draft a cover story to explain the study and procedures to participants
during the experiment. A cover story is a plausible (but potentially untrue) explanation to research
participants about the purpose of the study and study procedures. If any deception is used in the study, it
is important to draft a suitable debriefing approach. With any study plan, it is important to have all
procedures and materials approved by your sponsoring institution’s IRB (see Chapter 4).
Experimental Procedures
The specific experimental design procedures need to be identified. This description involves indicating the
overall experimental design, citing reasons for using the design to test study hypotheses, and a step-by-
step chronological description of the study procedures. Often a visual figure of the study procedures can
be helpful.
Type of Experiment
Identify the type of experimental design to be used in the proposed study. The types available in
experiments are pre-experimental designs, quasi-experiments, and true experiments. With pre-
experimental designs, the researcher studies a single group and implements an intervention during the
experiment. This design does not have a control group to compare with the experimental group. In quasi-
experiments, the investigator uses control and experimental groups, but the design may have partial or
total lack of random assignment to groups. In a true experiment, the investigator randomly assigns the
participants to treatment groups.

--- Page 210 ---
A single-subject design or N of 1 design involves observing the behavior of a single individual (or a
small number of individuals) over time.
Identify what is being compared in the experiment. In many experiments, those of a type called
between-subject designs, every participant experiences only one condition on a manipulated variable
of interest (Keppel & Wickens, 2003; Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991). One-way designs comprise only
one manipulated independent variable. By contrast, a factorial design manipulates two or more
independent variables to examine the independent and interactive effects of these treatment
variables on an outcome.
In contrast to between-subject designs, participants in within-subject designs experience multiple (or
all) conditions of a manipulated variable of interest. For example, a researcher may elect to employ
the same pre- and post-treatment measure (often called a repeated measures design), making
“time” (pre- and post-intervention) a within-subjects variable.
It is often the case that studies employ both a between subjects variable and a within-subjects
independent variable in the same study and are called mixed designs. For a study testing working
conditions among nurses and burnout symptoms, one could randomly assign a sample of nurses to
either work part time or full time for a period of time (a between-subjects variable) and measure their
burnout symptoms before and after this work manipulation (measuring burnout at two time points
creates a “time” within-subjects variable), making this study design a mixed design.
Provide a diagram or a figure to illustrate the specific research design to be used. A standard
notation system needs to be used in this figure. As a research tip, we recommend using the classic
notation system provided by Campbell and Stanley (1963, p. 6):
X represents an exposure of a group to an experimental variable or event, the effects of which
are to be measured.
O represents an observation or measurement recorded on an instrument.
Xs and Os in a given row are applied to the same specific persons.
Xs and Os in the same column, or placed vertically relative to each other, are simultaneous.
The left-to-right dimension indicates the temporal order of procedures in the experiment
(sometimes indicated with an arrow).
The symbol R indicates random assignment.
Separation of parallel rows by a horizontal line indicates that comparison. Groups are not equal
(or equated) by random assignment. No horizontal line between the groups displays random
assignment of individuals to treatment groups.
In Examples 8.1–8.4, this notation is used to illustrate pre-experimental, quasi-experimental, true
experimental, and single-subject designs.
Example 8.1 Pre-Experimental Designs
One-Shot Case Study. This design involves an exposure of a group to a treatment followed by a
measure.
Group A X ________________________ O
One-Group Pretest–Posttest Design. This design includes a pretest measure followed by a
treatment and a posttest for a single group.

--- Page 211 ---
Group A O1 _________ X _________ O2
Static Group Comparison or Posttest-Only With Nonequivalent Groups Design.
Experimenters use this design after implementing a treatment. After the treatment, the researcher
selects a comparison group and provides a posttest to both the experimental group(s) and the
comparison group(s).
Group A X _______________________ O
Group B _________________________ O
Alternative Treatment Posttest-Only With Nonequivalent Groups Design. This design uses the
same procedure as the Static Group Comparison, with the exception that the nonequivalent
comparison group received a different treatment.
Group A X1_________________________ O
Group B X2_________________________ O
Example 8.2 Quasi-Experimental Designs
Nonequivalent (Pretest and Posttest) Control-Group Design. In this design, a popular approach to
quasi-experiments, the experimental Group A and the control Group B are selected without
random assignment. Both groups take a pretest and posttest. Only the experimental group
receives the treatment.
Group A O ___________ X ___________O
Group B O ________________________O
Single-Group Interrupted Time-Series Design. In this design, the researcher records measures
for a single group both before and after a treatment.
Group A O—O—O—O—X—O—O—O—O
Control-Group Interrupted Time-Series Design. This design is a modification of the Single-Group
Interrupted Time-Series design in which two groups of participants, not randomly assigned, are
observed over time. A treatment is administered to only one of the groups (i.e., Group A).
Group A O—O—O—O—X—O—O—O—O
Group B O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O—O
Example 8.3 True Experimental Designs

--- Page 212 ---
Pretest–Posttest Control-Group Design. A traditional, classical design, this procedure involves
random assignment of participants to two groups. Both groups are administered both a pretest
and a posttest, but the treatment is provided only to experimental Group A.
Group A R ——––– O——— X ——— O
Group B R ——— O ——————— O
Posttest-Only Control-Group Design. This design controls for any confounding effects of a pretest
and is a popular experimental design. The participants are randomly assigned to groups, a
treatment is given only to the experimental group, and both groups are measured on the posttest.
Group A R——————X—————O
Group B R————————————O
Solomon Four-Group Design. A special case of a 2 × 2 factorial design, this procedure involves
the random assignment of participants to four groups. Pretests and treatments are varied for the
four groups. All groups receive a posttest.
Group A R———— O———X———O
Group B R————O———————O
Group C R————————X———O
Group D R——————————–—O
Example 8.4 Single-Subject Designs
A-B-A Single-Subject Design. This design involves multiple observations of a single individual. The
target behavior of a single individual is established over time and is referred to as a baseline
behavior. The baseline behavior is assessed, the treatment provided, and then the treatment is
withdrawn.
Baseline A Treatment B Baseline A
O–O–O–O–O–X–X–X–X–X–O–O–O–O–O–O
Threats to Validity
There are several threats to validity that will raise questions about an experimenter’s ability to conclude
that the manipulated variable(s) of interest affect an outcome and not some other factor. Experimental
researchers need to identify potential threats to the internal validity of their experiments and design them
so that these threats will not likely arise or are minimized. There are two types of threats to validity: (a)
internal threats and (b) external threats.
Internal Validity

--- Page 213 ---
Internal validity threats are experimental procedures, treatments, or experiences of the participants
that threaten the researcher’s ability to draw correct inferences from the data about the population in an
experiment. Table 8.5 displays these threats, provides a description of each one of them, and suggests
potential responses by the researcher so that the threat may not occur. There are those involving
participants (i.e., history, maturation, regression, selection, and mortality), those related to the use of an
experimental treatment that the researcher manipulates (i.e., diffusion, compensatory and resentful
demoralization, and compensatory rivalry), and those involving procedures used in the experiment (i.e.,
testing and instruments).
Table 8.5 Types of Threats to Internal Validity
Type of Threat to In Response, Actions the
Description of Threat
Internal Validity Researcher Can Take

--- Page 214 ---
Type of Threat to In Response, Actions the
Description of Threat
Internal Validity Researcher Can Take
History Because time passes during an The researcher can have both the
experiment, events can occur that experimental and control groups
unduly influence the outcome experience the same external events.
beyond the experimental treatment.
Maturation Participants in an experiment may The researcher can select
mature or change during the participants who mature or change at
experiment, thus influencing the the same rate (e.g., same age)
results. during the experiment.
Regression to the mean Participants with extreme scores A researcher can select participants
are selected for the experiment. who do not have extreme scores as
Naturally, their scores will probably entering characteristics for the
change during the experiment. experiment.
Scores, over time, regress toward
the mean.
Selection Participants can be selected who The researcher can select
have certain characteristics that participants randomly so that
predispose them to have certain characteristics have the probability of
outcomes (e.g., they are brighter). being equally distributed among the
experimental groups.
Mortality (also called Participants drop out during an A researcher can recruit a large
study attrition) experiment due to many possible sample to account for dropouts or
reasons. The outcomes are thus compare those who drop out with
unknown for these individuals. those who continue—in terms of the
outcome.
Diffusion of treatment Participants in the control and The researcher can keep the two
(also called cross experimental groups communicate groups as separate as possible
contamination of with each other. This communication during the experiment.
groups) can influence how both groups
score on the outcomes.
Compensatory/resentful The benefits of an experiment may The researcher can provide benefits
demoralization be unequal or resented when only to both groups, such as giving the
the experimental group receives the control group the treatment after the
treatment (e.g., experimental group experiment ends or giving the control
receives therapy, and the control group some different type of
group receives nothing). treatment during the experiment.
Compensatory rivalry Participants in the control group feel The researcher can take steps to
that they are being devalued, as create equality between the two
compared to the experimental groups, such as reducing the
group, because they do not expectations of the control group or
experience the treatment. clearly explaining the value of the
control group.

--- Page 215 ---
Type of Threat to In Response, Actions the
Description of Threat
Internal Validity Researcher Can Take
Testing
Participants become familiar with The researcher can have a longer
the outcome measure and time interval between administrations
remember responses for later of the outcome or use different items
testing. on a later test than were used in an
earlier test.
Instrumentation The instrument changes between a The researcher can use the same
pretest and posttest, thus affecting instrument for the pretest and
the scores on the outcome. posttest measures.
Source: Adapted from Creswell and Guetterman (2018).
External Validity
Potential threats to external validity also must be identified and designs created to minimize these threats.
External validity threats arise when experimenters draw incorrect inferences from the sample data to
other persons, other settings, and past or future situations. As shown in Table 8.6, these threats arise
because of the characteristics of individuals selected for the sample, the uniqueness of the setting, and
the timing of the experiment. For example, threats to external validity arise when the researcher
generalizes beyond the groups in the experiment to other racial or social groups not under study, to
settings not examined, or to past or future situations. Steps for addressing these potential issues are also
presented in Table 8.6.
Other threats that might be mentioned in the method section are the threats to statistical conclusion
validity that arise when experimenters draw inaccurate inferences from the data because of inadequate
statistical power or the violation of statistical assumptions. Threats to construct validity occur when
investigators use inadequate definitions and measures of variables.
Table 8.6 Types of Threats to External Validity

--- Page 216 ---
Types of
Threats
In Response, Actions the Researcher
to Description of Threat
Can Take
External
Validity
Interaction Because of the narrow characteristics of The researcher restricts claims about
of participants in the experiment, the groups to which the results cannot be
selection researcher cannot generalize to individuals generalized. The researcher conducts
and who do not have the characteristics of additional experiments with groups with
treatment participants. different characteristics.
Interaction Because of the characteristics of the The researcher needs to conduct additional
of setting setting of participants in an experiment, a experiments in new settings to see if the
and researcher cannot generalize to individuals same results occur as in the initial setting.
treatment in other settings.
Interaction Because results of an experiment are The researcher needs to replicate the study
of history time-bound, a researcher cannot at later times to determine if the same
and generalize the results to past or future results occur as in the earlier time.
treatment situations.
Source: Adapted from Creswell and Guetterman (2018).
Practical research tips for proposal writers to address validity issues are as follows:
Identify the potential threats to validity that may arise in your study. A separate section in a proposal
may be composed to discuss potential threats and the approaches used to minimize them.
Define the exact type of threat and what potential issue it presents to your study.

--- Page 217 ---
Discuss how you plan to address the threat in the design of your experiment.
The Procedure
A researcher needs to describe in detail the sequential step-by-step procedure for conducting the
experiment. A reader should be able to clearly understand the cover story explaining the study to
participants, the design being used, the manipulated variable(s) and outcome variable(s), and the
chronological sequence of study activities. It is also important to describe steps taken to minimize noise
and bias in the experimental procedures. For example, if the experimenter is aware of whether a
participant receives the treatment condition that will be most helpful, the experimenter might act in more
positive and reinforcing ways in administering the outcome measure. To reduce this form of
experimenter bias, it is helpful to make the experimenter administering the outcome measure blind to the
participant’s study condition. Blinding in experimental research is when the experimenter (and/or the
participant) is kept unaware of the participant’s assigned study condition. Thus, experimenter blinding is a
step a researcher could take to minimize bias and to describe in the experimental procedures (e.g., “To
reduce the risk of experimenter bias, the experimenter was blind to the participant’s study condition until
all outcome measures were assessed.”).
Discuss a step-by-step approach for the procedure in the experiment. For example, Borg and Gall (2006)
outlined steps typically used in the procedure for a pretest–posttest control group design with matching
participants in the experimental and control groups.
1. Administer measures of the dependent variable or a variable closely correlated with the dependent
variable to the research participants.
2. Assign participants to matched pairs on the basis of their scores on the measures described in Step
1.
3. Randomly assign one member of each pair to the experimental group and the other member to the
control group. Expose the experimental group to the experimental treatment, and administer no
treatment or an alternative treatment to the control group.
4. Administer measures of the dependent variables to the experimental and control groups.
5. Compare the performance of the experimental and control groups on the posttest(s) using tests of
statistical significance.
Data Analysis
Assigning participants to study conditions in experimental studies means that study analyses are
straightforward—the principle analyses test hypotheses that focus on comparing groups across these
study conditions. There are a series of steps to describe in the study data analytic plan:
Reporting the Descriptive Statistics
Some descriptive statistics commonly reported include frequencies (e.g., how many male and female
participants were in the study?), means and standard deviations (e.g., what’s the mean age of the
sample; what is the ethnic composition of the sample; what are the group means and corresponding
standard deviation values for the primary outcome measures?).
Preliminary Analysis
Report any preliminary analyses to be conducted prior to testing the study hypotheses. Some of these
include statistical tests evaluating (a) the success of randomization (i.e., was randomization successful in
creating equivalent groups across study conditions?); (b) whether the study independent variable(s)
manipulation(s) were successful (i.e., are there group differences on the manipulation check measure[s]);
and (c) whether there are associations (correlations) between key study variables (e.g., such as two
dependent variables collected in the study)?
Inferential Statistical Tests

--- Page 218 ---
Indicate the inferential statistical tests used to examine the hypotheses in the study. The same statistical
tests described for survey analyses are also used in experimental designs (see Table 8.3). However,
because a high priority is placed on comparing groups in experiments, there is heavy reliance on ANOVA,
ANCOVA, and multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) data analyses.
Factorial Designs
In factorial designs where more than one independent variable is manipulated, you can test for main
effects (of each independent variable) and interactions between independent variables. Also, like survey
method designs, indicate the practical significance by reporting effect sizes and confidence intervals.
Single-Subject Designs
For single-subject research designs, use line graphs for baseline and treatment observations for abscissa
(horizontal axis) units of time and the ordinate (vertical axis) target behavior. Researchers plot each data
point separately on the graph and connect the data points with lines (e.g., see Neuman & McCormick,
1995).
Occasionally, tests of statistical significance, such as t tests, are used to compare the pooled mean of
the baseline and the treatment phases, although such procedures may violate the assumption of
independent measures (Borg & Gall, 2006).
Preregistering the Study Plan
True experiments offer a way to test causal relations among independent and dependent variables
specified by formal hypotheses. Thus, preregistering the experimental study hypotheses and plan in a
public registry is important. Preregistration follows the same guidelines as those described for
preregistering a survey method plan discussed earlier in this chapter.
Interpreting Results and Writing a Discussion Section
After data collection is complete, the final step in an experiment is to interpret the findings in light of the
hypotheses or research questions and to draft a results and discussion section. The results section
follows the steps described in data analysis. In the discussion section writeup, address whether the
hypotheses were supported or whether they were refuted. Describe whether the independent variable
manipulation was effective (a manipulation check measure can be helpful in this regard). Suggest why the
results were significant, or why they were not, linking the new evidence with past literature (see Chapter
2), the theory used in the study (see Chapter 3), or persuasive logic that might explain the results.
Address whether the results might have been influenced by unique strengths of the approach, or
weaknesses (e.g., threats to internal validity) or study limitations, and indicate how the results might be
generalized to certain people, settings, and times. Finally, indicate the implications of the results for
science and society, including implications for future research on the topic.
Example 8.5 is a description of an experimental method plan adapted from a value affirmation stress
study published by Creswell and colleagues (Creswell et al., 2005).
Example 8.5 An Experimental Method Plan
This study tested the hypothesis that thinking about one’s important personal values in a self-
affirmation activity could buffer subsequent stress responses to a laboratory stress challenge
task. The specific study hypothesis was that the self-affirmation group, relative to the control
group, would have lower salivary cortisol stress hormone responses to a stressful performance
task. Here we highlight a plan for organizing the methodological approach for conducting this
study. For a full description of the study methods and findings, see the published paper (Creswell
et al., 2005).

--- Page 219 ---
Method
Participants
A convenience sample of 85 undergraduates will be recruited from a large public university on the
West Coast and compensated with course credit or $30. This sample size is justified based on a
power analysis conducted prior to data collection with the software program G*Power (Faul et al.,
2007; Faul et al., 2009) based on specific input parameters for power analysis. Participants will
be eligible to participate if they meet the following study criteria (list study inclusion and exclusion
criteria here). All study procedures have been approved by the University of California, Los
Angeles Institutional Review Board, and participants will provide written informed consent prior to
participating in study related activities.
The study is a 2 × 4 mixed design, with value affirmation condition as a two-level between-
subjects variable (condition: value affirmation or control) and time as a four-level within-subjects
variable (time: baseline, 20 minutes post-stress, 30 minutes post-stress, and 45 minutes post-
stress). The primary outcome measure is the stress hormone cortisol, as measured by saliva
samples.
Procedure
To control for the circadian rhythm of cortisol, all laboratory sessions will be scheduled between
the hours of 2:30 pm and 7:30 pm. Participants will be run through the laboratory procedures one
at a time. The cover story comprises telling participants that the study is interested in studying
physiological responses to laboratory performance tasks.
Upon arrival all participants will complete an initial values questionnaire where they will rank order
five personal values. After a 10-minute acclimation period, participants will provide a baseline
saliva sample for the assessment of salivary cortisol levels. Participants will then receive
instructions on the study tasks and then will be randomly assigned by the experimenter (using a
random number generator) to either a value affirmation or control condition, where they will be
asked to (description of the value affirmation independent variable manipulation here along with
the subsequent manipulation check measure). All participants will then complete the laboratory
stress challenge task (description of the stress challenge task procedures for producing a stress
response here). After the stress task, participants will complete multiple post-stress task
questionnaire measures (describe them here), and then provide saliva samples at 20, 30, and 45
minutes post-stress task onset. After providing the last saliva sample, participants will be
debriefed, compensated, and dismissed.
Summary
This chapter identified essential components for organizing a methodological approach and plan
for conducting either a survey or an experimental study. The outline of steps for a survey study
began with a discussion about the purpose, the identification of the population and sample, the
survey instruments to be used, the relationship between the variables, the research questions,
specific items on the survey, the steps to be taken in the analysis, and the interpretation of the
data from the survey. In the design of an experiment, the researcher identifies participants in the
study, the variables—the manipulated variable(s) of interest and the outcome variables—and the
instruments used. The design also includes the specific type of experiment, such as a pre-
experimental, quasi-experimental, true experiment, or single-subject design. Then the researcher
draws a figure to illustrate the design, using appropriate notation. This is followed by comments
about potential threats to internal and external validity (and possibly statistical and construct
validity) that relate to the experiment, the statistical analyses used to test the hypotheses or
research questions, and the interpretation of the results.

--- Page 220 ---
KEY TERMS
Blinding 182
Confidence interval 172
Construct validity 164
Cover story 176
Descriptive analysis 168
Effect size 172
Experimental design 159
Experimenter bias 182
External validity threats 182
Instruments 164
Internal validity threats 180
Interpretation in quantitative research 170
Manipulation check measure 175
Measure 164
Preregistration 169
Quasi-experiments 174
Random sampling 162
Reliability 165
Response bias 168
Statistical conclusion validity 182
Statistical significance testing 170
Study population 162
Study sample 162
Survey design 158
True experiment 174
Validity in quantitative research 164
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Describe the four primary elements of a method section plan.
2. Although both survey and experimental method plans have independent and dependent
variables, describe how the independent variable is treated differently in experimental studies

--- Page 221 ---
relative to survey studies.
3. Define and contrast a study population and a study sample.
4. What are the principal differences between the validity and reliability of an instrument?
Name and define two common forms of validity and two common forms of reliability of an
instrument.
5. What does it mean to preregister a study method plan?
6. In an experimental method plan, a researcher might consider making an independent variable
a between-subjects or a within-subjects variable. Define these two terms, and provide an
example of each one in a hypothetical study.
7. Using the hypothetical study example from Writing Exercise #6, offer an example of a
potential threat to internal validity and a potential threat to external validity.
Additional Readings
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for
research. In N. L. Gage (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (pp. 1–76). Rand McNally.
This chapter in the Gage Handbook is the classical statement about experimental designs.
Campbell and Stanley have designed a notation system for experiments that is still used today;
they also advanced the types of experimental designs, beginning with factors that jeopardize
internal and external validity, the pre-experimental design types, true experiments, quasi-
experimental designs, and correlational designs. The chapter presents an excellent summary of
types of designs, their threats to validity, and statistical procedures to test the designs. This is an
essential chapter for students beginning their study of experimental studies.
Fowler, F. J. (2014). Survey research methods (5th ed.). SAGE.
It is useful to understand the many steps taken in conducting good survey research. Floyd Fowler
provides a useful text about the decisions that go into the design of a survey research project. He
addresses use of alternative sampling procedures, ways of reducing nonresponse rates, data
collection, design of good questions, employing sound interviewing techniques, preparation of
surveys for analysis, and ethical issues in survey designs.
Keppel, G., & Wickens, T. D. (2003). Design and analysis: A researcher’s handbook (4th ed.).
Prentice Hall.
The introductory chapter of this handbook presents an informative overview of the components of
experimental designs. Geoffrey Keppel and Thomas Wickens provide a detailed, thorough
treatment of the design of experiments from the principles of design to the statistical analysis of
experimental data. Overall, this book is for the mid-level to advanced statistics student who seeks
to understand the design and statistical analysis of experiments.
Kraemer, H. C., & Blasey, C. (2016). How many subjects? Statistical power analysis in research.
SAGE.
Conducting a power analysis has become standard practice in quantitative research. This book
provides guidance on how to conduct power analyses for estimating sample size. This serves as
an excellent resource for both basic and more complex estimation procedures.
Lipsey, M. W. (1990). Design sensitivity: Statistical power for experimental research. SAGE.
Quantitative researchers need to identify an appropriate sample size for their studies. Mark
Lipsey has authored a major book on the topics of experimental designs and the statistical power
of those designs. Its basic premise is that an experiment needs to have sufficient sensitivity to
detect those effects it purports to investigate. The book explores statistical power and includes a
table to help researchers identify the appropriate size of groups in an experiment.

--- Page 222 ---
Neuman, S. B., & McCormick, S. (Eds.). (1995). Single-subject experimental research:
Applications for literacy. International Reading Association.
Many single-subject research designs exist for quantitative research. Susan Neuman and Sandra
McCormick have edited a useful, practical guide to the design of single-subject research. They
present examples of different types of designs, such as reversal designs and multiple-baseline
designs, and they enumerate the statistical procedures that might be involved in analyzing the
single-subject data. One chapter, for example, illustrates the conventions for displaying data on
line graphs. Although this book cites many applications in literacy, it has broad application in the
social and human sciences.
Nosek, B. A., Ebersole, C. R., DeHaven, A. C., & Cellor, D. T. (2018). The preregistration
revolution. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115, 2600–2606.
There has been a tremendous shift in recent years toward open science practices and active
discussions around how to improve the transparency, reliability, and replicability of scientific
research. This is a rapidly evolving area across the behavioral, social, and biological sciences—
and it would be valuable to new researchers using this book to initiate discussions with peers and
mentors around open science and preregistration practices. Brian Nosek is a leader in this area,
and this article discusses the value and approach to preregistering scientific research. Also see
the Center for Open Science website (www.cos.io).
Thompson, B. (2006). Foundations of behavioral statistics: An insight-based approach. Guilford.
Researchers can profit from a basic book reviewing the statistical approaches available. Bruce
Thompson has organized a highly readable book about using statistics. He reviews the basics
about descriptive statistics (location, dispersion, shape), about relationships among variables and
statistical significance, about the practical significance of results, and about more advanced
statistics such as regression, ANOVA, the general linear model, and logistic regression.
Throughout the book, he brings in practical examples to illustrate his points.

--- Page 223 ---
CHAPTER 9 QUALITATIVE METHODS
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Identify nine characteristics that might be included in a definition of qualitative research in a
study.
2. Compare the descriptive method and analytic method to selecting a qualitative research
design.
3. Contrast the advantages of using four types of collecting data in a qualitative study.
4. Learn how to construct a good interview protocol or guide for collecting qualitative data.
5. Name the seven steps in analyzing qualitative data.
6. Identify the components that go into an interpretation of qualitative findings.
7. Indicate eight approaches to writing about qualitative validity.
8. Discuss how to apply the six writing strategies when developing a qualitative written report.
INTRODUCTION
Qualitative methods demonstrate a different approach to scholarly inquiry than methods of quantitative
research. Although the processes are similar, qualitative methods rely on text and image data, have
unique steps in data analysis, and draw on diverse procedures. Writing a method section for a proposal
or study for qualitative research partly requires presenting a rationale for its use. Because many
approaches exist for the design of procedures in qualitative research, include information about the type
of design. Specify the types of qualitative data you plan to collect and how you will record the data on
protocols or guides. Go through the steps in data analysis that span from looking over the data to
generating themes and a story line. Use multiple strategies to validate your project’s findings, and write
your study creatively.
This chapter addresses these important components of writing a good qualitative method section into a
proposal or study. Table 9.1 presents a checklist for reviewing the qualitative methods section of your
project to determine whether you have addressed important topics.
Table 9.1 A Checklist of Questions for Designing a Qualitative Procedure

--- Page 224 ---
______ Are the basic characteristics of qualitative studies mentioned?
______ Is the specific type of qualitative design to be used in the study mentioned?
______ Is the purposeful sampling strategy for sites and individuals identified?
______ Is a clear recruitment strategy for enrolling participants mentioned?
______ Are the specific forms of data collection mentioned and a rationale for their use?
______ Are potential ethical issues identified and strategies presented for addressing them? Has
approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) been received?
______ Are the procedures for recording information during data collection detailed (such as
protocols)?
______ Are the data analysis steps identified?
______ Is there evidence that the researcher has organized the data for analysis?
______ Has the researcher reviewed the data generally to obtain a sense of the information?
______ Are the ways that the data will be represented mentioned—such as in tables, graphs, and
figures?

--- Page 225 ---
______ Has the researcher coded the data?
______ Have the themes been identified?
______ Have the bases for interpreting the analysis been specified (personal experiences, the
literature, questions, action agenda)?
______ Have multiple strategies been cited for validating the findings?
______ Has the researcher mentioned the outcome of the study (developed a theory, provided a
complex picture of themes)?
PUTTING QUALITATIVE RESEARCH INTO CONTEXT
For many years, qualitative writers had to discuss the characteristics of qualitative research and convince
faculty and audiences as to their legitimacy. These discussions are less frequently found today in the
literature and what constitutes qualitative inquiry. Reasons for using qualitative research need to be
provided in a project. Readers of a qualitative proposal or project often need to be oriented to the basic
features of qualitative research.
Review the needs of potential audiences for the proposal or study. Decide whether audience members
are knowledgeable enough about the characteristics of qualitative research that this section is not
necessary. For example, although qualitative research is typically accepted and well-known in the social
sciences, it has emerged in the health sciences only in the last couple of decades. Thus, a review of the
basic characteristics will be important for health science audiences. If there is some question about the
audience’s knowledge, present the basic characteristics of qualitative research, and consider discussing
a recent qualitative research journal article (or study) to use as an example to illustrate the
characteristics.
A project might convey the basic characteristics of qualitative research such as those found in current
writings (Creswell & Poth, 2018; Marshall & Rossman, 2022). A review of these is as follows.
Participants’ Meanings
In the entire qualitative research process, the researchers focus on learning the meaning that the
participants hold about the problem or issue, not the meaning that the researchers bring to the research
or that writers express in the literature.
Natural Setting
Qualitative researchers tend to collect data in the field at the site where participants experience the issue
or problem under study. Researchers do not bring individuals into a lab (a contrived situation), nor do they
typically send out instruments for individuals to complete. This up-close information gathered by talking
directly to people and seeing them behave and act within their context is a major characteristic of
qualitative research. In the natural setting, the researchers have face-to-face interaction, often extending
over a prolonged period.
Researcher as Key Instrument
Qualitative researchers collect data themselves through examining documents, observing behavior, or
interviewing participants. They may use a protocol—an instrument for recording data—but the

--- Page 226 ---
researchers are the ones who gather the information and interpret it. They do not tend to use or rely on
questionnaires or instruments developed by other researchers.
Multiple Sources of Data
Qualitative researchers typically gather multiple forms of data, such as interviews, observations,
documents, and audiovisual or social media information rather than rely on a single data source. Then the
researchers review all the data, make sense of it, and organize it into codes and themes that cut across
all data sources. These are all open-ended forms of data in which the participants share their ideas
freely, not constrained by predetermined scales or instruments.
Inductive and Deductive Data Analysis
Qualitative researchers typically work inductively, building patterns, categories, and themes from the
bottom up by organizing the data into increasingly more abstract units of information. This inductive
process illustrates working back and forth between the themes and the database until the researchers
have established a comprehensive set of themes. Then deductively, the researchers look back at their
data from the themes to determine if more evidence can support each theme or whether they need to
gather additional information. Thus, although the process begins inductively, deductive thinking also plays
an important role as the analysis moves forward.
Emergent Design
The research process for qualitative researcher is emergent. This means that the initial plan will evolve
during the research. Some or all phases of the process may change or shift after the researcher enters
the field and begins to collect data. For example, the questions may change, data collection forms may
shift, and the individuals studied and the sites visited may be modified. These shifts signal that the
researchers are delving deeper into the topic of the phenomenon under study. The key idea behind
qualitative research is to learn about the problem or issue from participants and to address the research
to obtain that information.
Reflexivity
In qualitative research, inquirers reflect about how their role in the study and their background, culture,
and experiences hold potential for shaping their interpretations, such as the themes they advance and the
meanings they ascribe to the data. Researchers explicitly identify reflexively the biases, values, and
personal background, such as gender, history, culture, and socioeconomic status (SES) that shape
interpretations formed during a study. This aspect of the methods is more than merely advancing biases
and values in the study but how the researchers’ background may shape the study’s direction.
Reflexivity requires commenting on two important aspects: (a) include statements about past
experiences with the research problem or with the participants or setting that help the reader understand
the connection between the researchers and the study—these experiences may involve participation in
the setting, past educational or work experiences, culture, ethnicity, race, SES, or other demographics
that directly tie the researchers to the study—and (b) be explicit about how these experiences may
potentially shape the interpretations the researchers make during the study. For example, the
experiences may cause researchers to lean toward certain themes, actively look for evidence to support
their positions, and create favorable or unfavorable conclusions about the sites or participants. Inquirers
incorporate reflexivity into a discussion of the methods. The comments can build on memos. Memos are
written notes taken by the researcher during the research process that reflect on the development of
codes and themes. In mentioning personal experiences, researchers need to limit their discussions about
personal experiences so that they do not override the importance of the content or methods in a study.
Researcher’s Role
Another aspect of reflection involves creating statements about the researcher’s role. These statements
mention connections between the researcher and the participants or the research sites that may unduly
influence the researcher’s interpretations. “Backyard” research (Glesne & Peshkin, 1992) involves
studying the researcher’s organization, or friends, or immediate work setting. This often leads to

--- Page 227 ---
compromises in the researcher’s ability to disclose information and raises issues of an imbalance of
power between the inquirer and the participants. When researchers collect data at their own workplaces
(or when they are in a superior role to participants), the information may be convenient and easy to
gather. Still, it may not be accurate information, and it may jeopardize the roles of the researchers and
the participants. If studying the “backyard” is essential, the researcher is responsible for showing how the
data will not be compromised and how such information will not place the participants (or the
researchers) at risk. In addition, multiple strategies for validation (see validation later in this chapter) are
necessary to demonstrate the accuracy of the information.
A Complex Account
Qualitative researchers try to develop a complex picture of the problem or issue under study. This
involves reporting multiple perspectives, identifying the many factors involved in a situation, and generally
sketching the larger picture. This larger picture is not necessarily a linear model of cause and effect but
rather a model of multiple factors interacting differently. Qualitative researchers would say this picture
mirrors real life and how events operate in the real world. A visual model of many facets of a process
aids in establishing this complex picture (see, e.g., Creswell & Brown, 1992).
THE APPROACH OR DESIGN
What design, approach, or set of procedures will be used in a study? We begin by mentioning the basic
or foundational procedures typically used in qualitative research and then highlighting the analytic
framework-oriented procedures that researchers may add (see Figure 9.1 for the distinctions between
descriptive methods and an analytic framework).
Description
Figure 9.1 Foundational Methods and Methods Drawn From Traditions
Sources: Braun & Clarke, 2005; Sandelowski, 2000, 2010.
Descriptive Methods
One approach to the procedures comprises coding the data and developing themes. Reporting themes,
or conducting a “theme analysis” (Levitt et al., 2018, p. 28) has found its way into qualitative research as
a distinct method approach. It has been called the “foundational method” of analysis, a “thematic
analysis,” or a “descriptive analysis” (Braun & Clark, 2006; Sandelowski, 2000, 2010). We call this
method “descriptive methods” and presented it as one qualitative design earlier in Table 1.3. A descriptive
method in qualitative research is an approach to analysis where the researcher stays close to the data,
uses limited frameworks and interpretation for explaining the data, and catalogues the information into

--- Page 228 ---
themes. The recent American Psychological Association standards identified it as a distinct type of
qualitative methods approach (Levitt et al., 2018). Figure 9.1 presents the major dimensions of
descriptive methods. It also suggests that these methods are foundational to more analytic frameworks,
which is not to suggest that it has less value and credibility than using a framework to report the codes
and themes.
Analytic Frameworks
In addition to descriptive methods, researchers may choose to use a larger interpretative framework in
their analysis. An analytic framework in qualitative designs means that the procedures used in
interpreting data fit into a predetermined structure identified in the literature. For example, narrative
research employs re-storying the participants’ stories using structural devices, such as plot, setting,
activities, climax, and denouement (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000). Phenomenological research analyzes
significant statements, the generation of meaning units, and the development of what Moustakas (1994)
called an “essence” description. Grounded theory has systematic steps (Corbin & Strauss, 2015; Strauss
& Corbin, 1990, 1998). These involve generating categories of information (open coding), selecting one of
the categories and positioning it within a theoretical model (axial coding), and then advancing a story from
the interconnection of these categories (selective coding). Case studies and ethnographic research
involve a detailed description of the setting or individuals, followed by data analysis for themes or issues
(see Stake, 1995; Wolcott, 1994).
An analytic framework means going beyond the everyday language of participants and using an “analytic
tradition” (Braun & Clark, 2006, p. 78). These frameworks may be considered an approach or a distinct
qualitative design, as suggested by Creswell and Poth (2018) and enumerated by multiple authors in
books and articles across the social and health sciences. Many approaches exist, such as the 28
identified by Tesch (1990), the 22 types in Wolcott (2008), and the five approaches to qualitative inquiry
by Creswell and Poth (2018). Marshall and Rossman (2022) discussed five types common across five
different authors. In Chapter 1 we identified several of these qualitative designs that researchers use:
narrative research, phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, and case studies. We selected these
five because they are popular across the social and health sciences today. Others exist that have been
addressed adequately in qualitative books, such as participatory action research (Kemmis & Wilkinson,
1998), discourse analysis (Cheek, 2004), or action research (Ivankova, 2015).
A detailed discussion of these frameworks for researchers is beyond the scope of this book and requires
that researchers read and develop an in-depth understanding of the analytic framework of choice. These
frameworks have their way of stating research questions, data collection procedures, data analysis
steps, and outcomes for the project.
In writing about the design or approach for a qualitative proposal, consider the following research
suggestions:
Identify the specific approach you will be using and provide references to the literature discussing the
approach.
Provide some background information about the approach, such as its discipline origin, its
applications (preferably to your field), and a brief definition (see Chapter 1 for the six approaches or
designs).
Discuss why it is an appropriate strategy to use in the proposed study.
Identify how the use of the approach will shape many aspects of the design process, such as the
title, the problem, the research questions, the data collection and analysis, and the report write-up.
DATA COLLECTION PROCEDURES
The data collection procedures include setting the boundaries for the study through sampling and
recruitment, gaining permissions, collecting information through multiple forms of data (e.g., observations,
interviews, documents, and visual and social media), and developing protocols or guides for collecting the
data.

--- Page 229 ---
Sampling and Recruitment
Identify the purposefully selected sites or individuals for the proposed study. Qualitative research aims to
purposefully sample to select participants or sites (or documents or visual material) that will best help
the researcher understand the problem and the research question. This does not necessarily suggest
random sampling or selection of many participants and sites, as is typically found in quantitative research.
A discussion of participants and the site might include four aspects identified by Miles and Huberman
(1994): (a) the setting (i.e., where the research will take place), (b) the actors (i.e., who will be observed
or interviewed), (c) the events (i.e., what the actors will be observed or interviewed doing), and (d) the
process (i.e., the evolving nature of events undertaken by the actors within the setting).
Discuss the strategies used to recruit individuals (or cases) to the study. This is a challenging aspect of
research. Indicate ways of informing appropriate participants about the study, and cite the actual
recruitment messages sent to them. Discuss ways to provide incentives for individuals to participate, and
reflect on approaches that will be used if one method of recruitment is not successful.
Comment on the number of participants and sites involved in the research. Aside from the small number
that characterizes qualitative research, how many sites and participants should you have? First, there is
no specific answer to this question; the literature contains a variety of perspectives (e.g., see Creswell &
Poth, 2018). From a review of many qualitative research studies, we have some rough estimates to
advance. Sample size depends on the qualitative design being used (e.g., ethnography, case study).
Narrative includes one or two individuals; phenomenology involves a range of 3–10; grounded theory, 20–
30; ethnography examines one single culture-sharing group with numerous artifacts, interviews, and
observations; and case studies include about four to five cases. We also suggest that the descriptive
method might include at least 20 participants. An estimated sample size is certainly one approach to the
sample size issue. Another approach is equally viable. The idea of saturation comes from grounded
theory. Charmaz (2006) said that one stops collecting data when the categories (or themes) are
saturated, that is, when gathering fresh data no longer sparks new insights or reveals new themes. This
is when you have an adequate sample.
Permissions
Indicate steps taken to obtain permission from the IRB (see Chapter 4) to protect the rights of human
participants. Attach, as an appendix, the approval letter from the IRB, and discuss the process involved in
securing permissions. Discuss steps taken to gain entry to the setting and to secure permissions to study
the participants or situation (Marshall & Rossman, 2022). It is important to gain access to research or
archival sites by seeking the approval of gatekeepers, that is, individuals at the site who provide access
to the site and allow or permit the research to be done. A brief proposal might need to be developed and
submitted for review to gatekeepers. Bogdan and Biklen (1992) advanced topics that could be addressed
in such a proposal:
Why was the site chosen for study?
What activities will occur at the site during the research study?
Will the study be disruptive?
How will the results be reported?
What will the gatekeeper gain from the study?
Data Collection Types
In many qualitative studies, inquirers collect multiple forms of data and spend a considerable time in the
natural setting gathering information. Indicate the type or types of data to be collected. The four major
types are as follows.
A qualitative observation is when the researcher takes field notes on the behavior and activities of
individuals at the research site. In these field notes, the researcher records activities at the site in an
unstructured or semi-structured way (using some prior questions that the inquirer wants to know).

--- Page 230 ---
Qualitative observers may also engage in roles varying from a nonparticipant to a complete participant.
Typically, these observations are open-ended in that the researchers ask general questions of the
participants, allowing the participants to provide their views freely.
In qualitative interviews, the researcher conducts face-to-face interviews or telephone interviews with
participants or engages in focus group interviews with six to eight interviewees in each group. These
interviews involve unstructured and generally a few open-ended questions and are intended to elicit views
and opinions from the participants.
During the process of research, the investigator may collect qualitative documents. These may be
public documents (e.g., newspapers, minutes of meetings, official reports) or private documents (e.g.,
personal journals and diaries, letters, e-mails).
A final category of qualitative data comprises qualitative audiovisual, social media, and digital
materials. This data may take the form of photographs, art objects, videotapes, website main pages, e-
mails, text messages, social media text, or forms of sound. Include creative data collection procedures
that fall under visual ethnography (Pink, 2001) and living stories, metaphorical visual narratives, and digital
archives (Clandinin, 2007).
In a discussion about data collection forms, be specific about the types, and include arguments
concerning the strengths and weaknesses of each type, as discussed in Table 9.2. Typically, in good
qualitative research the researchers draw on multiple sources of qualitative data to make interpretations
about a research problem.
Table 9.2 Qualitative Data Collection Types, Options, Strengths, and Limitations

--- Page 231 ---
Data
Options Within
Collection Strengths of the Types Limitations of the Types
Types
Types

--- Page 232 ---
Data
Options Within
Collection Strengths of the Types Limitations of the Types
Types
Types
Observations Complete participant Researcher has firsthand Researcher may be intrusive.
—researcher experience with the
conceals role participant. Private information may be
observed that researcher
Observer as Researcher can record cannot report.
participant—role of information as it occurs.
researcher is known Researcher may not have
Unusual aspects can be good attending and observing
Participant as noticed during observation. skills.
observer—
observation role Method is useful in exploring Certain participants (e.g.,
secondary to topics that may be children) may present special
participant role uncomfortable for problems in gaining rapport.
participants to discuss.
Complete observer—
researcher observes
without participating
Interviews Face-to-face— Method is useful when Provides indirect information
researcher conducts participants cannot be filtered through the views of
one-on-one, in-person directly observed. interviewees.
interview
Participants can provide Provides information in a
Telephone— historical information. designated place rather than
researcher interviews the natural field setting.
by phone Method allows researcher
control over the line of May provide bias responses
Focus group— questioning. due to researcher’s presence.
researcher interviews
participants in a group Not all people are equally
articulate and perceptive.
E-mail internet
interviews
Documents Public documents— Enables a researcher to Not all documents are equally
minutes of meetings obtain the language and articulate and perceptive.
or newspapers words of participants.
They may be protected
Private documents— Can be accessed at a time information unavailable to
journals, diaries, or convenient to researcher— public or private access.
letters an unobtrusive source of
information. They require the researcher to
search out the information in
Represents data to which hard-to-find places.
participants have given
attention. They require transcribing or
optically scanning for
Saves a researcher the time computer entry.
and expense of transcribing
as written evidence. Materials may be incomplete.
The documents may not be
authentic or accurate.

--- Page 233 ---
Data
Options Within
Collection Strengths of the Types Limitations of the Types
Types
Types
Audiovisual, Photographs May be an unobtrusive May be difficult to interpret.
social media, method of collecting data.
and digital Videotapes May not be accessible publicly
materials Provides an opportunity for or privately.
Art objects participants to directly share
their reality. May be disruptive and affect
Computer messages responses due to the
Is creative in that it captures presence of an observer (e.g.,
Sounds attention visually. photographer).
Film
Note: This table includes material adapted from Bogdan and Biklen (1992), Creswell and Poth (2018), and Merriam (1998).
Include data collection types that go beyond typical observations and interviews. These forms create
reader interest in a proposal and can capture useful information that observations and interviews may
miss. For example, examine the compendium of types of data in Table 9.3 that can be used to stretch the
imagination.
Ethical Issues
Comment about sensitive ethical issues during data collection (see Chapter 4). For each issue raised,
discuss how the research study will address it. Qualitative research involves talking directly with
participants, visiting research sites, and often conducting studies with vulnerable groups or populations.
Thus, sensitivity to potential ethical issues is paramount for a qualitative inquirer. Table 4.1, mentioned
earlier, illustrates many ethical issues central to qualitative research. For example, seek local cooperation
when gathering information from cultural groups, pilot-test the acceptability of qualitative data collection
procedures for participants, and gain permission from key leaders. Build trust with participants, and ask
respectful questions. In reporting results, use bias-free and nondiscriminatory language, and give credit
for ownership by the participants of the results.
Table 9.3 A Compendium of Qualitative Data Collection Sources

--- Page 234 ---
Observations
Conduct an observation as a participant or an observer.
Conduct an observation shifting position from participant to observer (and vice versa).
Interviews
Conduct one-on-one interviews in the same room or virtually via web-based or e-mail platforms.
Conduct a focus group interview in the same room or virtually via web-based or e-mail platforms.
Documents
Keep a research journal during the study, or have a participant keep a journal or diary.
Examine personal documents (e.g., letters, e-mails, private blogs).
Analyze organizational documents (e.g., reports, strategic plans, charts, medical records).
Analyze public documents (e.g., official memos, blogs, records, archival information).
Examine autobiographies and biographies.
Audiovisual, Social Media, and Digital Materials
Have participants take photographs or record videos (i.e., photo elicitation).
Use video or film in a social situation or of individuals.
Examine photographs or videos.
Examine websites, tweets, Facebook messages.
Collect sounds (e.g., musical sounds, a child’s laughter, car horns honking).
Gather phone or computer-based messages.
Examine possessions or ritual objects.
Source: Adapted from Creswell and Poth (2018).
Data Recording Procedures
Before entering the field, qualitative researchers plan their approach to data recording. The qualitative
proposal or project should identify the researcher’s procedures for recording data.
Observation Protocol or Guide
Plan to develop and use an observation protocol for recording observations in a qualitative study.
Researchers often engage in multiple observations during a qualitative study and use an observational
protocol for recording information while observing. This may be a single page with a dividing line down the

--- Page 235 ---
middle to separate descriptive notes (portraits of the participants, a reconstruction of dialogue, a
description of the physical setting, accounts of events, or activities) from reflexive notes (the researcher’s
thoughts, such as “speculation, feelings, problems, ideas, hunches, impressions, and prejudices” (Bogdan
& Biklen, 1992, p. 121). Also written on this form might be demographic information about the time,
place, and date of the field setting where the observations take place.
Interview Protocol
Plan to develop and use an interview protocol for asking questions and recording answers during a
qualitative interview. Researchers record information from interviews by making handwritten notes,
audiotaping, or videotaping. Even if an interview is taped, we recommend that researchers take notes if
recording equipment fails. If audiotaping is used, researchers need to plan for the transcription of the
tape. Information needs to be recorded about the time and date of the interview, where the interview took
place, and the interviewer and interviewee’s names.
The interview protocol should be about one to two pages in length. It should be prepared in advance of
the interview and used consistently in all the interviews. There should be some spaces between the
questions for the interviewer to write short notes and quotes if the audio-recording device does not work.
Although no precise number can be given, the total number of questions should be somewhere between
five and 10. It is helpful for the interviewer to memorize the questions so that the researcher does not
appear to be simply reading the interview protocol. The interview protocol comprises several important
components, including basic information about the interview, an introduction, the interview content
questions with probes, and closing instructions (see also Creswell & Bàez, 2020). An example of a
complete interview protocol is shown in Figure 9.2.
The protocol provides the instructions to the interviewer so that useful information is not overlooked
during a potentially anxious period of conducting the interview.
In the introduction section, the interviewer needs to introduce themselves and discuss the purpose of the
study. This purpose can be written out in advance and simply read by the interviewer. It should also
contain a prompt to the interviewer to collect a signed copy of the informed consent form (alternatively,
the participant may have already sent the form to the interviewer). The interviewer might also talk about
the general structure of the interview (e.g., how it will begin, the number of questions, the time it should
take) and ask the interviewee if they have any questions before beginning the interview. Finally, before
the interview begins, the interviewer may need to define some important terms used in the interview.

--- Page 236 ---
Description
Figure 9.2 Sample Interview Protocol or Guide
Source: Adapted from Asmussen & Creswell (1995); Creswell & Bàez (2021).
The content questions are the research sub-questions in the study, phrased to seem friendly to the
interviewee. They essentially parse the central phenomenon into its parts—asking about different facets
of the central phenomenon. Whether the final question would restate the central question is open to
debate. It is hoped that the interviewee has answered all of the sub-questions and the qualitative
researcher will understand how the central question has been answered.
These content questions also need to include interview probes. Probes are reminders to the researcher
of two types: to ask for more information or to ask for an explanation of ideas. The specific wording
might be as follows (with these words inserted into the interview protocol as a reminder to the
interviewer):
“Tell me more” (asking for more information)
“I need more detail” (asking for more information)
“Could you explain your response more?” (asking for an explanation)
“What does ‘not much’ mean?” (asking for an explanation)
Sometimes beginning qualitative researchers are uncomfortable with a small number of questions, and
they feel that their interview may be short with only a few (5–10) questions. True, some people may have

--- Page 237 ---
little to say (or little information to provide about the central phenomenon). Still, by including probes in the
interview, the researcher can expand the duration of the interview and net useful information. A final
question might be, “Who should I contact next to learn more?” or “Is there any further information you
would like to share that we have not covered?” These follow-up questions essentially net closure on the
interview and show the researcher’s desire to learn more about the interview topic.
In closing instructions, it is important to thank the interviewee for their time and respond to any final
questions. Assure the interviewee of the confidentiality of the interview. Ask if you can follow up with
another interview if one is needed to clarify certain points. One question that may surface is how
participants will learn about the results of your project. It is important to think through and provide a
response to this question because it involves your time and resources. A convenient way to provide
information to interviewees is to offer to send them an abstract of the final study. This brief
communication of results is efficient and convenient for most researchers.
DATA ANALYSIS PROCEDURES
A methods discussion in a qualitative proposal or study needs also to specify the steps in analyzing the
forms of qualitative data. The intent is to make sense out of text and image data. It involves segmenting
and taking apart the data (like peeling back the layers of an onion) and putting it back together. The
discussion in your study about qualitative data analysis might begin with several general points about the
overall process:
Simultaneous Procedures
Data analysis in qualitative research will proceed hand in hand with other parts of developing the
qualitative study, namely, the data collection and the write-up of findings. While interviews are going on,
researchers may be analyzing an interview collected earlier, writing memos that may ultimately be
included as a narrative in the final report, and organizing the structure of the study. This process is unlike
quantitative research in which the investigator collects the data, then analyzes the information, and finally
writes the report.
Winnowing the Data
Because text and image data are so dense and rich, all of the information cannot be used in a qualitative
study. Thus, in the analysis of the data, researchers need to “winnow” the data (Guest et al., 2012),
focusing on some of the data and disregarding other parts of it. This process, too, is different from
quantitative research in which researchers go to great lengths to preserve all the data and reconstruct or
replace missing data. In qualitative research, the impact of this process is to aggregate data into a small
number of themes, something between five and seven themes (Creswell & Poth, 2018).
Using Qualitative Computer Software Programs
Also specify whether you will use a qualitative computer data analysis program to assist you in analyzing
the data (or whether you will hand code the data). Hand coding is a laborious and time-consuming
process, even for data from a few individuals. Thus, qualitative software programs have become popular.
They help researchers organize, sort, and search for information in text or image databases (see the
Guest et al., 2012, chapter on qualitative data analysis software). Several excellent qualitative
computer software programs are available, and they have similar features with good tutorials and
demonstration files. In qualitative data analysis, they can incorporate both text and image (e.g.,
photographs) data, store and organize data, search text associated with specific codes, interrelate codes
for making queries of the relationship among codes, and import and export of qualitative data to
quantitative programs, such as spreadsheets or statistical programs. The basic idea behind these
programs is that using the computer efficiently stores and locates qualitative data. Although the
researcher still needs to go through each line of text (as in hand coding by going through transcriptions)
and assign codes, this computer process may be faster and more efficient than hand coding. Also, in
large databases, the researcher can quickly locate all passages (or text segments) coded the same and
determine whether participants respond to a codes idea in similar or different ways. Beyond this, the
computer program can facilitate relating different codes (e.g., How do males and females—the first
codes of gender—differ in their attitudes to smoking—a second code?). These are a few features of the

--- Page 238 ---
software programs that make them a logical choice for qualitative data analysis over hand coding. As
with any software program, qualitative software programs require time and skill to learn and employ
effectively, although books for learning the programs are widely available. Software programs do not
analyze the data; it is the researcher’s responsibility to conduct the analysis. Demos are available for
popular qualitative data analysis software programs, such as MAXqda® (www.maxqda.com/), Atlas.ti®
(www.atlasti.com), Provalis and QDA Miner (https://provalisresearch.com/), Dedoose™
(www.dedoose.com/), and QSR NVivo® (www.qsrinternational.com/).
Steps in the Analytic Process
As a research tip, we urge researchers to look at qualitative data analysis as a process that requires
sequential steps to be followed, from the specific to the general, and involves multiple levels of analysis.
Figure 9.3 presents a diagram of this process.
Step 1. Organizing and Preparing the Data for Analysis
This involves transcribing interviews, optically scanning material, typing up field notes, cataloging all the
visual material, and sorting and arranging the data into different types depending on the sources of
information.
Step 2. Reading Through All the Data
This step provides a general sense of the information and an opportunity to reflect on its overall meaning.
What general ideas are participants saying? What is the tone of the ideas? What is the impression of the
overall depth, credibility, and use of the information? Sometimes qualitative researchers write notes in
margins of transcripts or observational field notes, or start recording general thoughts about the data at
this stage. For visual data, a sketchbook of ideas can begin to take shape.
Step 3. Coding the Data
Coding is the process of organizing the data by bracketing chunks (or text or image segments) and
writing a word representing a category in the margins (Rossman & Rallis, 2012). It involves taking text
data or pictures gathered during data collection, segmenting sentences (or paragraphs) or images into
categories, and labeling those categories with a term, often based in the actual language of the
participant (called an in vivo term). More will be discussed on this important step later in this chapter.
Step 4. Identifying Themes
Use the coding process to generate a description of the setting or people and categories or themes for
analysis. Use the coding to generate a small number of themes or categories—perhaps five to seven
themes for a research study. The themes could be (a) a description of the setting or individual or (b)
themes learned about the problem. These themes are the ones that appear as major findings in
qualitative studies and are often used as headings in the findings sections of studies (or in a section of a
dissertation or thesis). They should display multiple perspectives from individuals and include diverse
quotations and specific evidence.

--- Page 239 ---
Description
Figure 9.3 Steps in the Qualitative Data Analysis Process
Step 5. Developing a Story Line Interpretation
Qualitative researchers can do much with themes beyond identifying the themes during the coding
process to build additional layers of complex analysis. For example, researchers interconnect themes into
a story line to present a chronology of development about the problem. The story line could also focus
on single individuals or groups of individuals. Story lines often appear in a discussion section in a journal
article report.
Step 6. Further Analyzing the Data Using an Analytic Framework
Steps 1–5 essentially provide a code-to-theme type of qualitative analysis, a descriptive methods
analysis discussed earlier. Researchers can use the code-to-theme method but then further analyze their
data using an interpretive framework such as narrative research, grounded theory, ethnography, case
study, or other analytic frameworks available in the literature.
Step 7. Representing and Interpreting the Data

--- Page 240 ---
Advance how the description and themes will be represented in the qualitative narrative. The most
popular approach is to use a narrative passage to convey the findings of the analysis. This might be a
discussion that mentions a chronology of events, a detailed discussion of several themes (complete with
subthemes, specific illustrations, multiple perspectives from individuals, and quotations) or a discussion
with interconnecting themes. Many qualitative researchers also use visuals, figures, or tables as adjuncts
to the discussions. They present a process model (as in grounded theory), advance a drawing of the
specific research site (as in ethnography), or convey descriptive information about each participant in a
table (as in case studies and ethnographies).
Coding the Data
Step 3 in the analytical process deserves special mention because it is a core component of qualitative
data analysis. A framework for conducting coding is shown in Table 9.4. Tesch (1990) provided the eight
steps typically used in forming codes and themes (categories). In addition, give some attention to the
types of codes to develop when analyzing a text transcript or a picture (or other type of visual object).
Table 9.4 Tesch’s Eight Steps in the Coding Process
1. Get a sense of the whole. Read all the transcriptions carefully. Perhaps jot down some ideas as
they come to mind as you read.
2. Pick one document (e.g., one interview)—the most interesting one, the shortest, the one on the
top of the pile. Go through it, asking yourself, “What is this about?” Do not think about the
substance of the information but its underlying meaning. Write thoughts in the margin.
3. When you have completed this task for several participants, make a list of all topics. Cluster
together similar topics. Form these topics into columns, perhaps arrayed as major, unique, and
leftover topics.
4. Now take this list and go back to your data. Abbreviate the topics as codes, and write the codes
next to the appropriate segments of the text. Try this preliminary organizing scheme to see if
new categories and codes emerge.
5. Find the most descriptive wording for your topics, and turn them into categories. Look for ways
of reducing your total list of categories by grouping topics that relate to each other. Perhaps
draw lines between your categories to show interrelationships.
6. Make a final decision on the abbreviation for each category, and alphabetize these codes.
7. Assemble the data material belonging to each category in one place, and perform a preliminary
analysis.
8. If necessary, recode your existing data.

--- Page 241 ---
Beyond this general coding process, we tend to think about codes as falling into expected, surprising,
and unusual codes.
Expected Codes
Based on the literature and common sense, code on topics that readers would expect to find. When
studying bullying in schools, we might code some segments as “attitudes toward oneself.” This code
would be expected in a study about bullying in schools.
Surprising Codes
Code on findings that are surprising and could not be anticipated before the study began. In a study of
leadership in nonprofit organizations, we might learn about the impact of geo-warming on the building of
the organization and how this shapes the location and proximity of individuals to one another. Without
going out to the building before the study begins and looking at it, we would not necessarily think about
the codes of geo-warming and location of offices in a study of leadership.
Codes of Unusual or Conceptual Interest
Code unusual ideas and those that are, in and of themselves, of conceptual interest to readers. We used
one of the codes we discovered in our qualitative study of a campus’s response to a gunman (Asmussen
& Creswell, 1995). We did not anticipate the code “retriggering” to emerge in our study, and it surfaced
from the perspective of a psychologist called to the campus to assess the response. The fact that
individuals were reminded of past traumatic incidents—retriggering—prompted us to use the term as an
important code and ultimately a theme in our analysis.
Predetermined Codes
Another issue about coding is whether the researcher should (a) develop codes only from emerging
information collected from participants, (b) use predetermined codes and then fit the data to them, or (c)
use some combination of emerging and predetermined codes. The traditional approach in the social
sciences allows the codes to emerge during the data analysis. In the health sciences, a popular approach
is to use predetermined codes based on the theory being examined.
The researchers might develop a qualitative codebook, a table containing a list of predetermined codes
that researchers use to code the data. Guest and colleagues (2012) discussed and illustrated the use of
codebooks in qualitative research. The intent of a codebook is to provide definitions for codes and to
maximize coherence among codes—especially when multiple codes are involved. This codebook would
provide a list of codes, a code label for each code, a brief definition of it, a full definition of it, information
about when to use the code and when not to use it, and an example of a quote illustrating the code. This
codebook can evolve and change during a study based on close analysis of the data when the researcher
is not starting from an emerging code perspective. For researchers who have a distinct theory they want
to test in their projects, we recommend developing a preliminary codebook for coding the data from the
theory and then permitting the codebook to develop and change based on the information learned during
the data analysis.
Visual Images as Codes
As mentioned earlier, visual data are used frequently in qualitative research. These data sources
represent images drawn from photographs, videos, film, and drawings (Creswell & Poth, 2018).
Participants might be handed a camera and asked to take pictures of what they see. Alternatively, they
may be asked to draw a picture of the phenomenon under study or reflect on a favorite picture or object
that would elicit responses. Challenges in using visual images do arise in qualitative research. Images
may reflect trends of the culture or society rather than the perspectives of a single individual. It is difficult
to respect anonymity when images of individuals and places represent qualitative data. Permissions are
needed to respect the privacy of individuals providing visual data.

--- Page 242 ---
INTERPRETATION
Interpretation in qualitative research involves several procedures: summarizing the overall findings,
comparing the findings to the literature, discussing a personal view of the findings, and stating limitations
and future research. In terms of overall findings, the question “What were the lessons learned?” captures
the essence of this idea (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). These lessons could be the researcher’s interpretation
couched in the understanding that the inquirer brings to the study a personal culture, history, and
experiences.
It could also be a meaning derived from comparing the findings with information gleaned from the
literature or theories. In this way, the authors suggest that the findings confirm past information or diverge
from it. It can also suggest new questions that need to be asked—questions raised by the data and
analysis that the inquirer had not foreseen earlier in the study. Wolcott (1994) said that ethnography can
end a study by stating further questions. The questioning approach is also used in transformative
approaches to qualitative research.
Moreover, qualitative researchers can form interpretations that call for action agendas for reform and
change when using a theoretical lens. Researchers might describe how the narrative outcome compares
with theories and the general literature on the topic. Researchers also discuss the literature at the end of
the study (see Chapter 2). Thus, interpretation in qualitative research can take many forms; be adapted
for different types of designs; and be flexible to convey personal, research-based, and action meanings.
Finally, part of interpretation involves suggesting limitations in a project and advancing future research
directions. Limitations often attach to the methods of a study (e.g., inadequate purposeful sampling,
difficulty in recruitment), and they represent weaknesses in the research that the author acknowledges so
that future studies will not suffer from the same problems. Suggestions for future proposed research
themes that studies might address to advance the literature, remedy some of the weaknesses in the
present study, or advance new leads or directions that can point to useful applications or knowledge.
VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY
Although validation of findings occurs throughout the steps in the research process, this discussion
focuses on how the researcher writes a passage in a proposal or study on the procedures to be
undertaken to validate the qualitative proposed study’s findings. Researchers need to convey the steps
they will take in their studies to check for the accuracy and credibility of their findings. Validity does not
carry the same connotations in qualitative research as quantitative research; nor is it a companion to
reliability (examining stability) or generalizability (the external validity of applying results to new settings,
people, or samples), topics discussed in Chapter 8. Qualitative validity means that the researcher
checks for the accuracy of the findings by employing certain procedures. In contrast, qualitative
reliability indicates that the researcher’s approach is consistent across different researchers and among
different projects (Gibbs, 2007).
Defining Qualitative Validity
Validity is one of the strengths of qualitative research and is based on determining whether the findings
are accurate from the researcher’s standpoint, the participant, or the readers of an account (Creswell &
Miller, 2000). Terms abound in the qualitative literature that addresses validity, such as trustworthiness,
authenticity, and credibility (Creswell & Miller, 2000), and it is a much-discussed topic (Lincoln et al.,
2011). A procedural perspective that we recommend for research proposals is to identify and discuss
one or more strategies available to check the accuracy of the findings.
Validity Strategies
Researchers should actively incorporate validity strategies into their proposals. We recommend the use
of multiple approaches, which should enhance the researcher’s ability to assess the accuracy of findings
and convince readers of the accuracy. There are eight primary strategies, organized from those used
most frequently and easiest to implement to those used occasionally and more difficult to implement:

--- Page 243 ---
Triangulate different data sources by examining evidence from the sources and using it to build a
coherent evidence for themes. If themes are established based on converging several sources of
data or perspectives from participants, this process adds to the study’s validity.
Use member checking to determine the accuracy of the qualitative findings by taking the final report
or specific descriptions or themes back to participants and determining whether these participants
feel that they are accurate. This does not mean taking back the raw transcripts to check for
accuracy; instead, the researcher takes back parts of the polished or semi-polished product, such as
the major findings, the themes, the case analysis, the grounded theory, the cultural description, and
so forth. This procedure can involve conducting a follow-up focus group interview with participants in
the study and providing an opportunity for them to comment on the findings.
Use a rich, thick description to convey the findings. This description may transport readers to the
setting and give the discussion an element of shared experiences. When qualitative researchers
provide detailed descriptions of the setting, for example, or offer many perspectives about a theme,
the results become more realistic and richer. This procedure can add to the validity of the findings.
Clarify the bias the researcher brings to the study. This self-reflection creates an open and honest
narrative that will resonate well with readers. Reflexivity has already been mentioned as a core
characteristic of qualitative research. Good qualitative research contains comments by the
researchers about how their interpretation of the findings is shaped by their background, such as
their gender, culture, history, and socioeconomic origin.
Present negative or discrepant information that runs counter to the themes. Because real life
comprises different perspectives that do not always coalesce, discussing contrary information adds
to an account’s credibility. A researcher can accomplish this by discussing evidence about a theme.
Most evidence will build a case for the theme. Researchers can also present information that
contradicts the general perspective of the theme. The account becomes more realistic and more
valid by presenting this contradictory evidence.
Spend prolonged time in the field. The more experience that a researcher has with participants in
their settings, the more accurate or valid will be the findings. In this way, the researcher develops an
in-depth understanding of the phenomenon under study and can convey details about the site and the
people, which lends credibility to the narrative account.
Use peer debriefing to enhance the accuracy of the account. This process involves locating a person
(a peer debriefer) who reviews and asks questions about the qualitative study so that the account
will resonate with people other than the researcher. This strategy—involving an interpretation beyond
the researcher and reported by another person—adds validity to an account.
Use an external auditor to review the entire project. As distinct from a peer debriefer, this auditor is
not familiar with the researcher or the project and can provide an objective assessment of the project
throughout the research process or after the study. The role is similar to that of a fiscal auditor, and
specific questions exist that auditors might ask (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Having an independent
investigator look over many aspects of the project (e.g., the accuracy of transcription, the
relationship between the research questions and the data, and the level of data analysis from the
raw data through interpretation) enhances the overall validity of a qualitative study.
Reliability Strategies
How do qualitative researchers check to determine if their approaches are reliable (i.e., consistent or
stable)? Yin (2009) suggested that qualitative researchers need to document the procedures of their
case studies and to document as many of the steps of the procedures as possible. He also
recommended setting up a detailed case study protocol and database so that others can follow the
procedures. Gibbs (2007) suggested several qualitative reliability procedures:
Check transcripts to ensure they do not contain obvious mistakes made during transcription.
Make sure that there is no change in the definition of codes, a shift in the meaning of the codes
during the coding process. This can be accomplished by continually comparing data with the codes

--- Page 244 ---
and by writing memos about the codes and their definitions (see the discussion on a qualitative
codebook).
For team research, coordinate the communication among the coders by regular documented
meetings and by sharing the analysis.
Cross-check codes developed by different researchers by comparing results that are derived
independently.
Intercoder Agreement
Proposal and project writers need to include several procedures as evidence that they will have
consistent results in their proposed study. We recommend that several procedures be mentioned in a
proposal and that single researchers find another person who can cross-check their codes for intercoder
agreement (or cross-checking) (also see Guest et al., 2012; Creswell & Bàez, 2020). Such an
intercoder agreement might be based on whether two or more coders agree on codes used for the
same passages in the text. It is not that they code the same passage of text; rather, they determine
whether another coder would code it with the same or a similar code. Reliability subprograms in
qualitative computer software packages can then be used to determine the level of consistency of coding.
Miles and Huberman (1994) recommended that the consistency of the coding be in agreement at least
80% of the time for good qualitative reliability.
Qualitative Generalization
Qualitative generalization is a term used in a limited way in qualitative research. This form of inquiry
intends not to generalize findings to individuals, sites, or places outside of those under study (see Gibbs,
2007, for his cautionary note about qualitative generalizability). The value of qualitative research lies in the
detailed description and themes developed in the context of a specific site. Particularity rather than
generalizability (Greene & Caracelli, 1997) is the hallmark of good qualitative research. However, there
are a few discussions in the qualitative literature about generalizability, especially as applied to case
study research in which the inquirer studies several cases. Yin (2009), for example, felt that qualitative
case study results can be generalized to some broader theory. When qualitative researchers study
additional cases and apply findings to the new cases, the generalization occurs. It is the same as the
replication logic used in experimental research. However, to repeat a case study’s findings in a new case
setting requires good documentation of qualitative procedures, such as a protocol for the problem and
the development of a thorough case study database.
WRITING THE QUALITATIVE REPORT
A plan for qualitative methods should end with some comments about the narrative that will emerge from
the data analysis. Numerous varieties of narratives exist, and examples from scholarly journals illustrate
these models. In a plan for a study, consider advancing several points about the narrative:
The basic procedure in reporting the results of a qualitative study is to develop descriptions and themes
from the data (see Figure 9.3) and to present these descriptions and themes that convey multiple
perspectives from participants and detailed descriptions of the setting or individuals. These results may
also provide a chronological narrative of an individual’s life (narrative research), a detailed description of
their experiences (phenomenology), a theory generated from the data (grounded theory), a detailed
portrait of a culture-sharing group (ethnography), and an in-depth analysis of one or more cases (case
study) or themes (descriptive method).
Given these different strategies, the findings and interpretation sections of a plan for a study might
discuss how the sections will be presented: as objective accounts, fieldwork experiences (Van
Maanen, 1988), a chronology, a process model, an extended story, an analysis by cases or across
cases, or a detailed descriptive portrait.
Writing Strategies

--- Page 245 ---
At the specific level, there might be some inclusion in the proposal or project about writing strategies that
will be used to convey the qualitative research. These might include the following:
Quotes: From short to long embedded passages
Dialogue reflecting the culture of participants, their language, a sensitivity to their culture or ethnicity,
and the interweaving of words from participants and the author’s interpretations
Varied narrative forms, such as matrices, comparison tables, and diagrams
First-person “I” or collective “we” pronouns in the narration
Metaphors and analogies (see, e.g., Richardson, 1990)
Narrative forms associated with specific qualitative strategies (e.g., description in case studies and
ethnographies, a detailed story in narrative research)
A SAMPLE QUALITATIVE METHOD SECTION
The following is a complete qualitative method section in a proposal by Miller (1992). It contains most of
the topics for a good qualitative method section addressed in this chapter. Miller’s project was an
ethnographic study of the first-year experiences of the president of a 4-year college. As we present this
discussion, we refer to the sections addressed in this chapter and highlight them in boldfaced type. Also,
we have maintained Miller’s use of the term informant, although today, researchers use the more
appropriate term, participant. Here is the example:
The Qualitative Research Paradigm
The qualitative research paradigm has its roots in cultural anthropology and American sociology (Kirk &
Miller, 1986). It has only recently been adopted by educational researchers (Borg & Gall, 1989). The
intent of qualitative research is to understand a particular social situation, event, role, group, or interaction
(Locke et al., 1987). It is largely an investigative process where the researcher gradually makes sense of
a social phenomenon by contrasting, comparing, replicating, cataloguing, and classifying the object of
study (Miles & Huberman, 1984). Marshall and Rossman (1989) have suggested that this entails
immersion in the everyday life of the setting chosen for the study; the researcher enters the informants’
world and, through ongoing interaction, seeks the informants’ perspectives and meanings. [Qualitative
assumptions are mentioned.]
Scholars contend that qualitative research can be distinguished from quantitative methodology by
numerous unique characteristics that are inherent in the design. The following is a synthesis of commonly
articulated assumptions regarding characteristics presented by various researchers.
1. Qualitative research occurs in natural settings, where human behavior and events occur.
2. Qualitative research is based on assumptions that are different from quantitative designs. Theory or
hypotheses are not established a priori.
3. The researcher is the primary instrument in data collection rather than some inanimate mechanism
(Eisner, 1991; Fraenkel & Wallen, 1990; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Merriam, 1988).
4. The data that emerge from a qualitative study are descriptive. That is, data are reported in words
(primarily the participant’s words) or pictures rather than in numbers (Fraenkel & Wallen, 1990;
Locke et al., 1987; Marshall & Rossman, 2022; Merriam, 1988).
5. The focus of qualitative research is on participants’ perceptions and experiences and the way they
make sense of their lives (Fraenkel & Wallen, 1990; Locke et al., 1987; Merriam, 1988). The attempt
is therefore to understand not one but multiple realities (Lincoln & Guba, 1985).
6. Qualitative research focuses on the process that is occurring as well as the product or outcome.
Researchers are particularly interested in understanding how things occur (Fraenkel & Wallen, 1990;
Merriam, 1988).
7. Idiographic interpretation is utilized. In other words, attention is paid to particulars, and data is
interpreted in regard to the particulars of a case rather than generalizations.
8. Qualitative research is an emergent design in its negotiated outcomes. Meanings and interpretations
are negotiated with human data sources because it is the subjects’ realities that the researcher

--- Page 246 ---
attempts to reconstruct (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Merriam, 1988).
9. This research tradition relies on the utilization of tacit knowledge (intuitive and felt knowledge)
because often the nuances of the multiple realities can be appreciated most in this way (Lincoln &
Guba, 1985). Therefore, data are not quantifiable in the traditional sense of the word.
10. Objectivity and truthfulness are critical to both research traditions. However, the criteria for judging a
qualitative study differ from quantitative research. First and foremost, the researcher seeks
believability based on coherence, insight and instrumental utility (Eisner, 1991), and trustworthiness
(Lincoln & Guba, 1985) through a process of verification rather than through traditional validity and
reliability measures. [Qualitative characteristics are mentioned.]
The Ethnographic Research Design
This study will utilize the ethnographic research tradition. This design emerged from the field of
anthropology, primarily from the contributions of Bronislaw Malinowski, Robert Park, and Franz Boas
(Jacob, 1987; Kirk & Miller, 1986). The intent of ethnographic research is to obtain a holistic picture of
the subject of study with emphasis on portraying the everyday experiences of individuals by observing
and interviewing them and relevant others (Fraenkel & Wallen, 1990). The ethnographic study includes in-
depth interviewing and continual and ongoing participant observation of a situation (Jacob, 1987) and in
attempting to capture the whole picture reveals how people describe and structure their world (Fraenkel
& Wallen, 1990). [The author uses the ethnographic approach.]
The Researcher’s Role
Particularly in qualitative research, the role of the researcher as the primary data collection instrument
necessitates the identification of personal values, assumptions, and biases at the outset of the study. The
investigator’s contribution to the research setting can be useful and positive rather than detrimental
(Locke et al., 1987). My perceptions of higher education and the college presidency have been shaped
by my personal experiences. From August 1980 to May 1990, I served as a college administrator on
private campuses of 600 to 5,000 students. Most recently (1987–1990), I served as the dean for student
life at a small college in the Midwest. As a member of the president’s cabinet, I was involved with all top-
level administrative cabinet activities and decisions and worked closely with the faculty, cabinet officers,
president, and board of trustees. In addition to reporting to the president, I worked with him through his
first year in office. I believe this understanding of the context and role enhances my awareness,
knowledge, and sensitivity to many of the challenges, decisions, and issues encountered as a first-year
president and will assist me in working with the informant in this study. I bring knowledge of both the
structure of higher education and of the role of the college presidency. Particular attention will be paid to
the role of the new president in initiating change, relationship building, decision-making, and providing
leadership and vision.
Due to previous experiences working closely with a new college president, I bring certain biases to this
study. Although every effort will be made to ensure objectivity, these biases may shape the way I view
and understand the data I collect and the way I interpret my experiences. I commence this study with the
perspective that the college presidency is a diverse and often difficult position. Although expectations are
immense, I question how much power the president has to initiate change and provide leadership and
vision. I view the first year as critical: filled with adjustments, frustrations, unanticipated surprises, and
challenges. [Author reflects on her role in the study.]
Bounding the Study
Setting
This study will be conducted on the campus of a state college in the Midwest. The college is situated in a
rural Midwestern community. The institution’s 1,700 students nearly triple the town’s population of 1,000
when classes are in session. The institution awards associate, bachelor, and master’s degrees in 51
majors.
Actors

--- Page 247 ---
The informant in this study is the new president of a state college in the Midwest. The primary informant
in this study is the president. However, I will be observing him in the context of administrative cabinet
meetings. The president’s cabinet includes three vice presidents (Academic Affairs, Administration,
Student Affairs) and two deans (Graduate Studies and Continuing Education).
Events
Using ethnographic research methodology, the focus of this study will be the everyday experiences and
events of the new college president and the perceptions and meaning attached to those experiences as
expressed by the informant. This includes the assimilation of surprising events or information and making
sense of critical events and issues that arise.
Processes
Particular attention will be paid to the role of the new president in initiating change, relationship building,
decision-making, and providing leadership and vision. [Author mentions data collection boundaries.]
Ethical Considerations
Most authors who discuss qualitative research design address the importance of ethical considerations
(Locke et al., 1982; Marshall & Rossman, 2022; Merriam, 1988; Spradley, 1980). First and foremost, the
researcher has an obligation to respect the rights, needs, values, and desires of the informant(s). To an
extent, ethnographic research is always obtrusive. Participant observation invades the life of the
informant (Spradley, 1980), and sensitive information is frequently revealed. This is of particular concern
in this study where the informant’s position and institution are highly visible. The following safeguards will
be employed to protect the informant’s rights: (a) the research objectives will be articulated verbally and
in writing so that they are clearly understood by the informant (including a description of how data will be
used); (b) written permission to proceed with the study as articulated will be received from the informant;
(c) a research exemption form will be filed with the IRB (Appendixes B1 and B2); (d) the informant will be
informed of all data collection devices and activities; (e) verbatim transcriptions and written interpretations
and reports will be made available to the informant; (f) the informant’s rights, interests, and wishes will be
considered first when choices are made regarding reporting the data; and (g) the final decision regarding
informant anonymity will rest with the informant. [Author addresses ethical issues and IRB review.]
Data Collection Strategies
Data will be collected from February through May 1992. This will include a minimum of bi-monthly, 45-
minute recorded interviews with the informant (initial interview questions, Appendix C), bi-monthly 2-hour
observations of administrative cabinet meetings, bi-monthly 2-hour observations of daily activities, and bi-
monthly analysis of the president’s calendar and documents (meeting minutes, memos, publications). In
addition, the informant has agreed to record impressions of his experiences, thoughts, and feelings in a
taped diary (guidelines for recorded reflection, Appendix D). Two follow-up interviews will be scheduled
for the end of May 1992 (see Appendix E for the proposed timeline and activity schedule). [The author
proposed to use face-to-face interviews, participate as observer, and obtain private documents.]
To assist in the data collection phase, I will utilize a field log, providing a detailed account of ways I plan
to spend my time when I am on site and in the transcription and analysis phase (also comparing this
record to how time is actually spent). I intend to record details related to my observations in a field
notebook and keep a field diary to chronicle my own thinking, feeling, experiences, and perceptions
throughout the research process. [The author records descriptive and reflective information.]
Data Analysis Procedures
Merriam (1988) and Marshall and Rossman (1989) contend that data collection and data analysis must
be a simultaneous process in qualitative research. Schatzman and Strauss (1973) have claimed that
qualitative data analysis primarily entails classifying things, persons, and events and the properties that
characterize them. Typically throughout the data analysis process ethnographers index or code their data
using as many categories as possible (Jacob, 1987). They seek to identify and describe patterns and

--- Page 248 ---
themes from the perspective of the participant(s), then attempt to understand and explain these patterns
and themes (Agar, 1980). During data analysis, the data will be organized categorically and
chronologically, reviewed repeatedly, and continually coded. A list of major ideas that surface will be
chronicled (as suggested by Merriam, 1988). Taped interviews and the participant’s taped diary will be
transcribed verbatim. Field notes and diary entries will be regularly reviewed. [Author describes steps
in data analysis.]
In addition, the data analysis process will be aided by the use of a qualitative data analysis computer
program called HyperQual. Raymond Padilla (Arizona State University) designed HyperQual in 1987 for
use with the Macintosh computer. HyperQual utilizes HyperCard software and facilitates the recording
and analysis of textual and graphic data. Special stacks are designated to hold and organize data. Using
HyperQual the researcher can directly “enter field data, including interview data, observations,
researcher’s memos, and illustrations . . . (and) tag (or code) all or part of the source data so that
chunks of data can be pulled out and then be reassembled in a new and illuminating configuration”
(Padilla, 1989, pp. 69–70). Meaningful data chunks can be identified, retrieved, isolated, grouped, and
regrouped for analysis. Categories or code names can be entered initially or at a later date. Codes can
be added, changed, or deleted with HyperQual editor, and text can be searched for key categories,
themes, words, or phrases. [Author mentions the proposed use of computer software for data
analysis.]
Verification
In ensuring internal validity, the following strategies will be employed:
1. Triangulation of data—Data will be collected through multiple sources to include interviews,
observations, and document analysis.
2. Member checking—The informant will serve as a check throughout the analysis process. An ongoing
dialogue regarding my interpretations of the informant’s reality and meanings will ensure the truth
value of the data.
3. Long terms and repeated observations at the research site—Regular and repeated observations of
similar phenomena and settings will occur on site over a 4-month period of time.
4. Peer examination—a doctoral student and graduate assistant in the Educational Psychology
Department will serve as a peer examiner.
5. Participatory modes of research—The informant will be involved in most phases of this study, from
the design of the project to checking interpretations and conclusions.
6. Clarification of researcher bias—At the outset of this study researcher bias will be articulated in
writing in the dissertation proposal under the heading “The Researcher’s Role.”
The primary strategy utilized in this project to ensure external validity will be the provision of rich, thick,
detailed descriptions so that anyone interested in transferability will have a solid framework for
comparison (Merriam, 1988). Three techniques to ensure reliability will be employed in this study. First,
the researcher will provide a detailed account of the focus of the study, the researcher’s role, the
informant’s position and basis for selection, and the context from which data will be gathered (LeCompte
& Goetz, 1984). Second, triangulation or multiple methods of data collection and analysis will be used,
which strengthens reliability as well as internal validity (Merriam, 1988). Finally, data collection and
analysis strategies will be reported in detail to provide a clear and accurate picture of the methods used
in this study. All phases of this project will be subject to scrutiny by an external auditor who is
experienced in qualitative research methods. [Author identifies strategies of validity to be used in the
study.]
REPORTING THE FINDINGS
Lofland (1974) has suggested that although data collection and analysis strategies are similar across
qualitative methods, the way the findings are reported is diverse. Miles and Huberman (1984) have
addressed the importance of creating a data display and suggest that narrative text has been the most
frequent form of display for qualitative data. This is a naturalistic study. Therefore, the results will be
presented in descriptive, narrative form rather than as a scientific report. Thick description will be the
vehicle for communicating a holistic picture of the experiences of a new college president. The final
project will be a construction of the informant’s experiences and the meanings he attaches to them. This
will allow readers to vicariously experience the challenges he encounters and provide a lens through
which readers can view the subject’s world. [Outcomes of the study are mentioned.]

--- Page 249 ---
Summary
This chapter explores the components of developing and writing a qualitative method section for a
proposal. The chapter advances a general guideline for procedures. This guideline includes a
discussion about the characteristics of qualitative research if audiences are not familiar with this
approach to research. These characteristics are that data are based on participants’ meanings,
take place in the natural setting, rely on the researcher as the instrument for data collection,
employ multiple methods of data collection, use inductive and deductive thinking, include
researcher reflexivity, and are complex. This guideline recommends using a code-to-theme
descriptive method and then possibly adding on an analytic framework, such as the study of
individuals (narrative, phenomenology); the exploration of processes, activities, and events (case
study, grounded theory); or the examination of broad culture-sharing behavior of individuals or
groups (ethnography). The choice of design needs to be presented and defended.
Further, the proposal or study needs to address the role of the researcher: past experiences,
history, culture, and how this potentially shapes interpretations of the data. It also includes
discussing personal connections to the site, steps to gain entry, and anticipating sensitive ethical
issues. Discussion of data collection should advance the purposeful sampling approach and the
forms of data to be collected (i.e., observations, interviews, documents, and audiovisual, media,
and digital materials). It is useful to also indicate the use of data recording protocols. Data
analysis is an ongoing process during research. It involves analyzing participant information, and
researchers typically employ general analysis steps and those steps found within a specific design
or approach. More general steps include organizing and preparing the data; an initial reading
through the information; coding the data; developing from the codes a description and thematic
analysis; using computer programs; representing the findings in tables, graphs, and figures; and
interpreting the findings. These interpretations involve stating lessons learned, comparing the
findings with past literature and theory, raising questions, offering personal perspective, stating
limitations, and advancing an agenda for future research. The project should also contain a section
on the expected outcomes for the study. Finally, an additional important step in planning a
proposal is to mention the strategies that will be used to validate the accuracy of the findings and
demonstrate the reliability of codes and themes.
KEY TERMS
Analytic framework 196
Audiovisual, social media, and digital materials 200
Coding 207
Gatekeepers 199
Intercoder agreement 215
Interpretation in qualitative research 212
Interview protocol 203
Memos 195
Observation protocol 203
Probes 205
Purposefully sample 198
Qualitative codebook 211
Qualitative computer software programs 206

--- Page 250 ---
Qualitative documents 199
Qualitative generalization 215
Qualitative interviews 199
Qualitative observation 199
Qualitative reliability 213
Qualitative validity 213
Reflexivity 194
Saturation 198
Story line 209
Validity strategies 213
WRITING EXERCISES
1. Defend why “reflexivity” is an essential component in a qualitative study.
2. What is the difference between a “descriptive method” and an “analytic method”?
3. Define “purposeful sampling” in qualitative research. Why is it important?
4. How are codes formed? Discuss the process.
5. Do personal opinions have a role in interpreting findings in a qualitative study? Discuss.
6. Identify two validation strategies that you might use in a qualitative project. Define each
strategy.
Additional Readings
Creswell, J. W., & Bàez, J. C. (2020). The 30 essential skills for the qualitative researcher (2nd
ed.). SAGE.
Consider reading this book both as an introduction to qualitative research and the specific
applications of qualitative research in a project. It includes steps for conducting many of the most
important qualitative inquiry procedures. It discusses the essential nature of qualitative research,
specific procedures for conducting an observation and interview, the detailed procedures of data
analysis, the uses of computer programs for assisting in qualitative data analysis, validity
strategies, and intercoder agreement checks.
Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2018). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among
five approaches (4th ed.). SAGE.
This book goes beyond an introduction and covers five analytic methods. The basic premise of
this book is that all qualitative research is not the same, and over time, variations in procedures of
conducting qualitative inquiry have evolved. This book discusses five analytic approaches to
qualitative research: (a) narrative research, (b) phenomenology, (c) grounded theory, (d)
ethnography, and (e) case studies. A process approach is taken throughout the book in which the
reader proceeds from broad philosophical assumptions and on through the steps of conducting a
qualitative study (e.g., developing research questions, collecting and analyzing data, etc.). The
book also presents comparisons among the five approaches so that the qualitative researcher can
make an informed choice about what strategy is best for a study.
Guest, G., MacQueen, K. M., & Namey, E. E. (2012). Applied thematic analysis. SAGE.

--- Page 251 ---
Individuals conducting qualitative research need to master the procedures involved in creating
codes and then aggregating them into themes. This book provides a practical study of themes and
data analysis in qualitative research. It contains detailed passages about the development of
codes, codebooks, themes, and approaches to enhancing validity and reliability (including
intercoder agreement) in qualitative research. It explores data reduction techniques and a
comparison of themes. It presents useful information about qualitative data analysis software
tools and procedures for integrating quantitative and qualitative data.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2022). Designing qualitative research (7th ed.). SAGE.
For many years, this book has been a staple introducing qualitative research. Catherine Marshall
and Gretchen Rossman introduce the procedures for designing a qualitative study and a
qualitative proposal. The topics covered are comprehensive. They include building a conceptual
framework around a study; the logic and assumptions of the overall design and methods; data
collection and procedures for managing, recording, and analyzing qualitative data; and the
resources needed for a study, such as time, personnel, and funding. This is a comprehensive and
insightful text from which both beginners and more experienced qualitative researchers can learn.
Descriptions of Images and Figures
Back to Figure
Descriptive methods lead to analytic framework.
Descriptive methods:
Based on everyday language of participants.
Little interpretation from theory or preexisting frameworks.
Maximum variation in sampling.
Cataloging the data into themes
Analytic framework, for example, narrative study, phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, case
study:
Specific frameworks for data collection or analysis
Limited variability in its application
Popularized in specific disciplines
Philosophical foundation
Back to Figure
The sample is broken up into three sections: Introduction, Interview Content Questions, and Closing
Instructions. The text reads as follows:
Introduction.
Introduce yourself.
Discuss the purpose of the study.
Get informed consent signature.

--- Page 252 ---
Provide structure of the interview, audio recording, taking notes.
Ask if interviewee has questions.
Define any terms necessary.
Interview Content Questions.
1. What has been your role in the incident? ice breaker
Probes: Tell me more. Please explain.
2. What has happened since the event that you have been involved in? content
question
Probes: Tell me more. Please explain.
3. What has been the impact on the university community of this incident? content
question
Probes: Tell me more. Please explain.
4. What larger ramifications, if any, exist from the incident? content question
Probes: Tell me more. Please explain.
5. To whom should we talk to find out more about campus reaction to the incident?
follow-up question
Probes: Tell me more. Please explain.
Closing Instructions.
Thank the individual for participating.
Assure individual of confidentiality.
If needed, request further interviews.
If asked, comment on how interviewee will receive results of the study.
Back to Figure
The steps from bottom to top are as follows:
Step 1. Organizing and preparing the data for analysis, for example, transcripts, fieldnotes
Step 2. Reading through all the data
Step 3. Coding the data
Step 4. Identifying themes, grouping the codes into themes
Step 5. Developing a story line interpretation, interconnecting the themes
Step 6. Adding an analytic framework
Step 7. Representing or interpreting the data

--- Page 253 ---
CHAPTER 10 MIXED METHODS PROCEDURES
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
1. Describe each of the six characteristics of mixed methods research to use in a definition.
2. Create a justification for using mixed methods research in a proposal or study.
3. Define key terms used in mixed methods, such as open- and closed-ended data, research
design, integration, joint displays, and metainferences when presented in a proposal or study.
4. Contrast quantitative and qualitative data when presented in a study.
5. Identify for a core design its intent, procedures for data collection, integration,
metainferences, and validity.
6. Choose a type of mixed methods design for a study, and present reasons for the choice.
7. Identify the elements that go into an integration statement for a proposal or a study.
INTRODUCTION
Up until this point, we have considered writing quantitative and qualitative methods. We have not
discussed “mixing” or combining the two forms of data in a study: a mixed methods procedure. We can
start with the assumption that both forms of data provide different types of information (open-ended data
in the case of qualitative and closed-ended data in the case of quantitative). Suppose we further assume
that each type of data collection has both limitations and strengths. In that case we can consider how to
combine the strengths to develop a stronger understanding of the research problem or questions (and
overcome the limitations of each). In a sense, more insight into a problem must be gained from mixing or
integrating the quantitative and qualitative data. This “mixing” or integrating of data provides a stronger
understanding of the problem or question than either by itself. Mixed methods research is simply “mining”
the databases more by integrating them. This idea is at the core of a new methodology called “mixed
methods research.”
Table 10.1 shows a checklist of the mixed methods procedures addressed in this chapter. The checklist
follows the chapter topics and some important terms for engaging in this methodology.
Table 10.1 A Checklist of Questions for Designing a Mixed Methods Procedure
______ Have you defined mixed methods research?
______ Do you justify using mixed methods methodology for your problem and question?

--- Page 254 ---
______ Have you collected both quantitative and qualitative data?
______ Have you described your intent for collecting both forms of data? (integration statement)
______ Have you identified a type of mixed methods design or set of procedures to integrate your
data? (mixed methods design)
______ Have you provided a diagram of your design procedures?
______ Have you identified how you will analyze your data for integration? (use of a joint display)
______ Have you drawn conclusions (or metainferences) from analyzing the integration?
______ Have you discussed validity and ethics related to your research design?
______ Have you written your mixed methods study to reflect your use of design?
PUTTING MIXED METHODS RESEARCH IN PERSPECTIVE
Mixed methods research as a distinct methodology originating around the late 1980s. Understanding
some of its history is important to pose a good rationale for using it. In its 35-year history mixed methods
research has evolved into a complete methodology with clear descriptions of major elements that go into
its research, such as problems, data collection, data analysis, interpretation, and written products. It has
been called the “third methodological movement” (Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2010) alongside the other two—
quantitative and qualitative research. It sits between these two other methodologies and incorporates
both.
Several texts outline the major development of the methodology (e.g., Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018;
Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009). It emerged roughly during 1985–1990 when several scholars, working
independently from diverse disciplines (e.g., management, education, sociology, medicine) began crafting
books and journal articles about the research approach (Bryman, 1988; Greene et al., 1989). By the late
1990s and early 2000s, specific books articulated the new methodology (e.g., Tashakkori & Teddlie,
1998). In 2003, the Handbook of Mixed Methods in the Social and Behavior Sciences (Tashakkori &
Teddlie, 2003) firmly set the large dimensions of the new field of mixed methods research. By 2007, the
field had its first dedicated journal in the Journal of Mixed Methods Research. By 2011, the U.S. federal
government took an active interest in mixed methods. It issued a report and then updated it called the
“Best Practices of Mixed Methods Research in the Health Sciences” (National Institutes of Health, Office
of Behavioral and Social Sciences, 2011, 2018).
An international community of mixed methods scholars formed, and by 2014 the Mixed Methods
International Research Association (MMIRA) was born. This association soon expanded internationally
into specific countries worldwide starting chapters, affiliate groups, and regional conferences. Training
programs in mixed methods research soon emerged in 2015, such as the NIH Mixed Methods Research
Training Program, housed at Johns Hopkins University, Harvard, and the University of Michigan. Training
workshops started at the Mixed Methods Research Program at the University of Michigan. More recently
the American Psychological Association included standards for mixed methods research in its Publication
Manual (American Psychological Association, 2020), signaling that mixed methods had found its way into
the internationally popular style manual for the first time. Today, many empirical studies in various fields
have used mixed methods, innovations have expanded through methodological journal articles, and many
books are available on the subject (Molina-Azorin & Fetters, 2022).

--- Page 255 ---
CHARACTERISTICS OF MIXED METHODS RESEARCH
Understanding mixed methods’ growth and popularity helps frame this methodology in a dissertation or a
study. It is helpful to use the term mixed methods when referring to this approach. Other terms are
available in the literature, such as integrating, synthesis, quantitative and qualitative methods,
multimethod, mixed research, or mixed methodology, but the term “mixed methods” has become
popular in the field through numerous writings (Bryman, 2006; Creswell, 2022; Tashakkori & Teddlie,
2010). Multimethod research refers to the collection of multiple quantitative or qualitative sources of data
and is not mixed methods research. In contrast, mixed methods research collects both quantitative and
qualitative data.
The following defining characteristics, including collecting both forms of data, are central to understanding
and describing mixed methods research. We recognize that many definitions are available in the literature
(see varied scholars’ views of defining mixed methods research in Johnson et al., 2007). However, for a
mixed methods study or proposal, include the following specific components (see Figure 10.1 for a visual
diagram of these characteristics):
Description
Figure 10.1 Essential Components of Mixed Methods Research
The researcher:
Collects two types of data—qualitative (open-ended) and quantitative (closed-ended) data—to
study the research problem or question
Connects the two data sets, called integration
Uses procedures to integrate the two data sets, called a mixed methods design
Analyzes integration typically in a table, called a joint display, by representing the two databases
together in the procedures
Draws conclusions, insight, or interpretation from the integration analysis, called metainferences
Frames the study with the researcher’s beliefs, values (worldview), and explanations drawn from the
literature (theories).
In Chapter 1 we mentioned the importance of framing these procedures within the personal perspective
of the researcher (worldview) and in explanations drawn typically from the literature (theories). In Figure
10.1, the components of a definition will be emphasized in the sections to follow. These topics also
provide a good overview of the entire field of mixed methods research. Writings on mixed methods drill
down in detail on each of these topics, something beyond the scope of this book. However, references at
the end of this chapter should guide readers toward deeper explanations. Thus, a mixed methods section

--- Page 256 ---
should begin by defining mixed methods research and advancing its definition based on its essential
characteristics. This discussion should also include reasons for selecting the methodology.
JUSTIFICATION FOR USING MIXED METHODS RESEARCH
Numerous reasons can justify the use of mixed methods research in a project. Researchers may have
access to both quantitative and qualitative data; advisers may recommend it as a recent, popular
methodology; funding sources may require it; and individuals may simply want to practice applying it to
their topics. In addition, it does provide for the use of two different types of data. It encourages the
further “mining” of the data beyond the results yielded by either the quantitative or qualitative databases.
It seems suitable for studying the complex problems of today that require gathering numbers and hearing
the voices of individuals. For example, a good illustration would be the research and reports about the
pandemic where we daily view statistics on new cases and hear the stories about individuals resisting the
vaccinations. Mixed methods can also be attractive to private foundations and federal agencies that now
encourage the use of this methodology. A useful addition for individuals trained in quantitative research
would be to collect qualitative data to provide evidence to back up the numbers.
These are all important reasons for using this methodology. However, added to this list would be the
reasons for combining the two databases and the insight that yields. This insight provides more
information than simply reporting the quantitative and qualitative results. What possible insights might
emerge from combining or linking the quantitative and qualitative databases? Here are some possibilities:
Developing a complete understanding of a research problem by combining the quantitative and
qualitative results
Explaining quantitative results in more detail with qualitative data
Improving measures, scales, and instruments by incorporating the views of participants who received
the instruments
Augmenting experiments or trials by incorporating the perspectives of individuals
Developing cases (i.e., organizations, units, or programs) or documenting diverse cases for
comparisons
Evaluating programs based on combining quantitative and qualitative data
Developing a complete understanding of changes needed for a marginalized group through the
combination of qualitative and quantitative data
DEFINITIONS OF MIXED METHODS TERMS
Terms introduced in this chapter may be new to readers, and we begin by defining key terms so that
researchers can begin to build their language of mixed methods research.
Open- and Closed-Ended Data
Open-ended data consists of information gathered where the researchers ask a question but do not
provide a response option. Instead, the participants share their views, and the researcher records them.
As applied to qualitative observations and documents, the researcher does not use a predetermined set
of response options but observes or looks at documents to see meaning.
Closed-ended data consists of information gathered where the researcher provides participants with
response options, such as rating scales from strongly agree to strongly disagree. We feel that
distinguishing the two types of data is more specific than referring to numbers versus texts or numeric
data versus stories. Some data sources can be both closed- and open-ended, such as health data with
closed-ended scores on medical tests and open-ended information from recording a patient’s history.

--- Page 257 ---
Research Design
The research design is the procedure used in conducting a study. They extend from the broad
philosophical assumptions to the data interpretation. As used for a mixed methods design, this refers to
the procedures in the research process of collecting data, analyzing data, and interpreting it. Two
categories of designs will be discussed here, recognizing that many types have emerged over the years
(Creswell & Plano Clark, 2018; Creswell & Plano Clark, in press). We advanced core designs including
convergent designs, explanatory sequential designs, and exploratory sequential designs. These designs
are found in all mixed methods studies. Further, these core designs can be embedded within more
expansive processes or frameworks. Here the primary intent is not simply the integration of the two
databases but to have mixed methods support the procedures of a process or framework. We call these
complex designs. Complex designs presented in this chapter include experimental processes,
participatory action research frameworks, case study procedures, and evaluation processes. Rather than
a long list of types of designs, we feel that most studies can fit into these core and complex designs.
Integration
Integration represents a central concept in mixed methods research. This important concept involves
combining or “mixing” in a study or a series of studies information from the quantitative and qualitative
data. Integration in our discussion will consist of reasons or “intent” of combining the two databases and
the “procedures” of enacting this combination. Further, integration differs depending on the type of mixed
methods design. In terms of procedures the researcher either merges or combines the two databases or
connects them by one building on the other. For complex designs, the integration involves embedding one
or more core designs into a larger process or framework, such as an experiment, evaluation, or a
participant action research project.
Joint Display
In the procedures of combining data, the researcher needs some way to examine the effect of bringing
the two databases together. A joint display is a table or graph that presents the side-by-side
combination of the two databases. Joint displays differ for types of designs because the procedures for
combining vary by designs.
Metainferences
As a researcher examines the joint display table or graph, conclusions are drawn about the insight
emerging from comparing the two databases. In mixed methods, these insights are called
metainferences, which suggests that a researcher concludes quantitative and qualitative inferences and
then draws additional inferences (metainferences) based on combining the quantitative and qualitative
databases.
THE PROCESS OF CONDUCTING A MIXED METHODS STUDY
The process of conducting a mixed methods study involves connecting the quantitative and qualitative
data to a specific type of mixed methods design. In this design, the researcher draws a diagram of the
design, integrates the two databases, presents the integration in a table or joint display for analysis, and
draws insight or metainferences from the results of the integration.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DATA COLLECTION
In mixed methods procedures, after defining the methodology with key characteristics and a rationale for
its use, the researcher needs to indicate the types of qualitative and quantitative data collected. We start
with the data discussion because it is concrete and easily grasped by readers. Our approach involves
thinking about this form of research as gathering both quantitative and qualitative data and then combining
them. In this way, a researcher learns more about the problem under study because insights go beyond
simply learning about the quantitative and qualitative results; learning comes from the combination or
integration of the two databases. In this spirit, we talk about “mining” the data further when using mixed

--- Page 258 ---
methods research. If a researcher can gather both quantitative and qualitative data, then an opportunity
opens for the use of mixed methods research.
One helpful strategy is to pose a general problem for the mixed methods study and gather two types of
data—quantitative and qualitative—to address this problem. The types of research problems studied by
mixed methods researchers span many fields and topics, and we see empirical mixed methods studies
reported in a wide assortment of social, behavioral, and health science journals today.
In conducting mixed methods research, these two forms provide different types of data to answer the
general research problem or question because one is open-ended and the other closed- ended
information. Mixed methods researchers can profit from developing a table for a proposal or report that
specifies both the quantitative and qualitative data sources. To bring the two databases together in
integration, one needs to have a clear sense of the types of data gathered.
We recommend composing and presenting in a proposal or report a table that lists the sources of
quantitative and qualitative data in a project. The source can be named (e.g., attitudinal instrument,
interview); the number of people, observations, or documents collected; and specific details about the
sources (e.g., the specific instrument and scales, the online interviews).
Core Mixed Methods Designs
There have been several typologies for classifying and identifying types of mixed methods procedures
that researchers might use in their proposed mixed methods study. Creswell and Plano Clark (2018)
identified several classification systems drawn from the fields of evaluation, nursing, public health,
education policy and research, and social and behavioral research. In these classifications, authors have
used diverse terms for their types of designs, and a substantial amount of overlap of types has existed in
the typologies. For purposes of clarifying the design discussion in the mixed methods field, we will identify
three core mixed methods designs as shown in Figure 10.2—the convergent design, the explanatory
sequential design, and the exploratory sequential design. Then we will identify more designs, called
complex designs (or embedded designs), in which the core designs are embedded within a framework or
process beyond mixed methods. We begin with the three core designs and indicate the intent for using
each, the general procedures, and the issues of validity and ethics.
The Convergent Mixed Methods Design
The intent of the convergent design is to compare the results from the qualitative databases with those
from the quantitative database by merging the results (see Figure 10.2). The key assumption of this
approach is that both qualitative and quantitative data provide different types of information. These types
are detailed views of participants, qualitative, and scores on instruments, quantitative. Together they yield
results that should be the same. In past years, we have described this design as a “concurrent” or
“parallel” design. Focusing on comparing the two databases shifts the emphasis from the vague, historic
words of “concurrent” or “parallel” to the intent to compare the results. When comparing the results, the
additional purpose or intent may be to see if the findings converge (match) or diverge, mutually support a
construct, or validate one form of data with another.
The convergent mixed methods design is probably the most familiar of the core and complex mixed
methods approaches. New researchers to mixed methods typically first think of this approach because
they feel that mixed methods comprise only combining the quantitative and qualitative data. It builds off
the historic concept of the multimethod, multi-trait idea from Campbell and Fiske (1959), who suggested
understanding a psychological trait by gathering different forms of data. Although the Campbell and Fiske
conceptualization included only quantitative data, the mixed methods researchers extended the idea to
include quantitative and qualitative data collection.

--- Page 259 ---
Description
Figure 10.2 Three Core Designs
The procedures for data collection in this single-phase approach involves the researcher collecting
quantitative and qualitative data, analyzing them separately, and then comparing the results to see if the
findings confirm or disconfirm each other. The qualitative data assumes types discussed in Chapter 9,
such as interviews, observations, documents, and records. The quantitative data can be instrument data,
observational checklists, or numeric records, such as census data, as discussed in Chapter 8. Ideally, the
key idea with this design is to collect both forms of data using the same or parallel variables, constructs,
or concepts. For example, when researchers measure the concept of self-esteem during quantitative
data collection, they ask about the same concept during the qualitative data collection process. Some
researchers will use this design to associate themes with quantitative data and qualitative data. For
instance, Shaw et al. (2013) compared quality improvement practices in family medicine clinics with
colorectal cancer screening rates. Another data collection issue is the sample size for the qualitative and
quantitative data collection process. Unquestionably, the data for the qualitative data collection will be
smaller than that for the quantitative data collection. This is because the intent of data collection for
qualitative data is to locate and obtain information from a small purposeful sample and to gather
extensive information from this sample; whereas, in quantitative research, a large N is needed to infer
meaningful statistical results from samples to a population.
Sometimes mixed methods researchers will collect information from the same number of individuals in the
qualitative and quantitative databases. This means that the qualitative sample increases, limiting the
amount of data collected from any one individual. Another approach would be to weight the qualitative
cases to equal the N in the quantitative database. One other approach taken by some mixed methods
researchers is not to consider the unequal sample sizes a problem. They would argue that the intent of
qualitative and quantitative research differs (one to gain an in-depth perspective and the other to
generalize to a population) and that each provides an adequate account. Another issue in sampling is
whether the individuals for the sample of qualitative participants should also be individuals in the
quantitative sample. Typically, mixed methods researchers include the sample of qualitative participants in
the larger quantitative sample. Ultimately, researchers make a comparison between the two databases,
and the more they are similar, the better the comparison.
Integrative data analysis in a convergent design comprises three phases. First, analyze the qualitative
database by coding the data and collapsing the codes into broad themes. Second, analyze the
quantitative database in terms of statistical results. Third, conduct a mixed methods data analysis of the
integration of the two databases. Mixed methods data analysis can be called integration analysis.
There are several ways to integrate the two databases: First, researchers can make a side-by-side
comparison. Less frequently seen in the mixed methods literature today, these comparisons are found in
the discussion sections of mixed methods studies. The researcher will first report the quantitative
statistical results and then discuss the qualitative findings (e.g., themes) that either confirm or disconfirm
the statistical results. Alternatively, the researcher might start with the qualitative findings and then
compare them to the quantitative results. Mixed methods writers call this a side-by-side approach

--- Page 260 ---
because the researcher makes the comparison within a discussion, presenting first one set of findings
and then the other.
Second, researchers can also merge the two databases by changing or transforming qualitative codes or
themes into quantitative variables and then combining the two quantitative databases—a procedure in
mixed methods research called data transformation. To form quantitative measures the researcher
takes the qualitative themes or codes and counts them (and possibly groups them). Some useful
transformation procedures that mixed methods researchers have used can be found in Onwuegbuzie and
Leech (2006). This approach is popular among researchers trained in quantitative research who may not
see the value of an independent qualitative interpretive database.
Third, a final procedure involves merging the two forms of data in a table or a graph. This table or graph
is called a joint display of data, and it can take many different forms. The joint display needs to relate to
the mixed methods design, and it has become a standard procedure for integrating the two databases in
mixed methods studies. See the template for a convergent design joint display in Table 10.2. As shown in
Table 10.2, we have constructed a template without actual data. A template is advantageous to learn
about joint displays because it shows the overall structure.
Table 10.2 Template for a Convergent Design Joint Display
Scores Theme 1 Theme 2 Theme 3 Theme 4 Metainferences
High Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Insight
Medium Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Insight
Low Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Quote/Scores Insight
Metainferences Insight Insight Insight Insight Insight
Many joint displays are available in the mixed methods literature (see Guetterman et al., 2015). The joint
display shown in Table 10.2 arrays four themes on the horizontal axis and a categorical variable (high,
medium, and low scores) on the vertical axis. The information in the cells can be quotes, scores, or both.
The joint display can also be arrayed differently with a table with key questions or concepts on the
vertical axis and then two columns on the horizontal axis indicating qualitative responses and quantitative
responses to the key questions or concepts (e.g., Li et al., 2000). The basic idea is for the researcher to
jointly display both forms of data—effectively merging them—in a single visual and then make an
interpretation of the display (see Guetterman et al., 2015).
As seen in Table 10.2, we added to the themes and scores a column and row for metainferences. In this
way, the researcher can derive results by looking across the rows or columns with qualitative and
quantitative data. For example, how do the scores for the high, medium, and low scoring individuals differ
for theme 1? How do the high-scoring individuals differ among the four themes? The process involves
looking across databases and drawing conclusions or insight from the analysis. This constitutes the mixed
methods analysis of integration of the two databases, and these insights can be added into a study in a
results section or a discussion section. Further, the researcher can look for types of integrative results,
such as whether the qualitative and quantitative results provide confirmation of the databases, show

